



window.RufflePlayer=window.RufflePlayer||{};window.RufflePlayer.config={"autoplay":"on","unmuteOverlay":"hidden","showSwfDownload":true};


    __wm.init("https://web.archive.org/web");
  __wm.wombat("http://szabo.best.vwh.net/bitgold.html","20140406003811","https://web.archive.org/","web","https://web-static.archive.org/_static/",
	      "1396744691");





   
   
   Bit Gold: Towards Trust-Independent Digital Money

 


Nick Szabo's Papers and Concise Tutorials 





Bit Gold: Towards Trust-Independent Digital Money
Copyright (c) 1999, 2005 by Nick Szabo


   



Abstract
We introduce a new class of functions, secure benchmark functions.
We compare and contrast the properties of these functions to those
of cryptographic one-way functions.  We use benchmark functions,
as well as techniques of cryptography and replication, to
construct a novel financial system, bit gold, which serves 
not only as a payment scheme, but also as a long term store of value 
independent of any trusted authority.  We compare and contrast the 
properties of bit gold to the properties of traditional
stores of value based on verifiable scarcity, such as precious 
metals and rare collector's items.  Finally, we construct
an intermint digital cash clearing mechanism using bit gold,
resulting in a system of digital cash backed by bit gold.


Table of Contents
Introduction

Attributes of Collectibles

Conclusion

References

Acknowledgements






Introduction

Talk about hashcash and MicroMint, and the two basic problems they
have:

(1) value is still dependent on a central authority,
(2) hash functions are cryptographically vulnerable



Using benchmark functions, event ordering (timestamping)
with chains of one-way hash functions, and a replicated
registry, we present the first ever design for a digital 
long term store of value.


Bit Gold -- An Overview
For the last several years on this list I've been posting
on the subject of "virtual" or bit gold.  With lots of 
valuable feedback, thanks.  The objective, which I 
argued for vigorously, was to create a long term store of 
value independent of any central authority, yet far more
secure than traditional gold.  The basic outline 
of the system I described was as follows:


(1) bits are generated using an algorithm of known computational
cost, e.g. computing an n-bit hash collision (as proposed by 
Rivest/Shamir for MicroMint and implemented Adam Back with hashcash).
In general there are challenge bits input into a
 benchmark function, which produces solution bits.
The desiderata of a benchmark function is fundamentally
different from that of a cryptographic one-way function,
and I have developed a new formalization to reflect
this[1].  Anyone interested in studying such functions, please
contact me.


(2) the bits which are the solution to the challenge are added 
to a multiparty hash chain (i.e., they are securely timestamped),
then converted into the next challenge.


(3) Representations of ownership of these solution bits are stored
in a public manner, e.g. in a 

distributed property title registry
I also
originally suggested (both off the list and in an impractical but
privacy-protecting form I described on the list) that publically 
known levels of wealth can be represented by a system of publicly
shared books.  However, I think using this approach and discarding the
solution bits raises several unecessary problems.


(4) Titles to the bits are traded, achieving a market price
based on their estimated original cost of computation
and continuing scarcity versus the demand for a
secure long term store of value.


All four steps are indispensable to creating a long
term source of conserved value, independent of a central
trusted authority, in contrast to Adam Back's hashcash
and the Rivest/Shamir Micromint.  Also in contrast
to digital cash, there is no central authority trusted
to define or conserve value.  Bit gold achieves all the 
essential properties of gold, while avoiding the insecurity 
of gold which has plagued civilization for millenia.   


Of particular importance are the secure timestamps.
Solutions computed on different dates will have market prices
corresponding to the costs of the hardware and software used to
generate solutions on those dates.  


Another fundamental difference from MicroMint and hashcash is 
that solution bits are never cancelled.  Once created, a costly, 
securely timestamped solution maintains its rarity for all time.


I have also described how publically traded bit gold can
be used as a reserve commodity by mints issuing digital
cash notes.  The mints clear each others' notes in exchange
for face value of reserve commodity, forming a classic free 
banking clearinghouse.  The use of the classic mechanism in 
England and elsewhere has been well described by Lawrence H. 
White et. al.  In my online version, public bit gold is used 
"wholesale" to conserve value among mints, while private 
digital cash is used "retail" as currency.  The relatively 
inefficient and public protocol of reserves transfer
is used only in the process of clearinghouse settlement 
between mints.  In addition there will likely be an
extensive collectors' and speculators' market in bit gold,
bit gold futures reflecting estimates of future computation
costs, etc.


A potential big problem remains: the possibility of a trade
secret algorithmic or hardware breakthrough.  The world 
lacks a cryptanalytically stable problem.  Almost every year there 
are cryptanalytic breakthroughs speeding up cryptanalysis of 
particular block ciphers or hash functions by \( 2^{10} \) or more, 
and there are no proven lower bounds precluding such a breakthrough
for any cryptographic algorithm.  


Furthermore, benchmark functions are fundamentally different from 
one-way functions: it's not a matter remaining secure enough,
with overkill fine, but rather of maintaining a similar degree of 
difficulty among all the "cycle miners".  On the other hand, we 
don't need an infeasible assymetry between cryptographer and 
cryptanalyst, only a measurable one.  I have formalized these 
distinctions, defining this new class of functions[1] and initiating 
their study.  Anyone interested in researching such functions, please 
contact me.


Secure timestamps allow the market to easily adjust to any kind
of public breakthroughs in hardware, software, or algorithm
design, even breakthroughs of many orders of magnitude.
Profits from trade secret breakthroughs will be bounded by 
the ability to "mine cycles" without detectably flooding a market.
Given other mechanisms likely extent (e.g. secure anonymous
remailers) it is unlikely that a very valuable trade secret
of this kind can remain secret for long, but this is
speculation at this point.


[1] Here's my formal definition of a benchmark function:

f: {0,1}* --&gt; {0,1}* is called a strong k-benchmark function 
for machine model M and k&gt;=1 if the following hold:

1. f is computable in O(p(n)) time on M, where p is a polynomial.
2. f does not shrink the input more than q(n,k), where q(n,k)
is a polynomial of degree k.
3. For every randomized algorithm A running on M in time
less than q(n,k)p(n), there exists an N such that for n &gt; N
	\( Pr[A(f(x)) = f^{-1}(f(x))] &lt; 1/{q(n,k)p(n)} \)

In other words, there is no algorithm running faster
than q(n,k)p(n) which can invert f for more than a negligibly
small number of values. 

Economics
Hal Finney writes an excellent summary of free banking analyses,
and includes the following proposal:

Perhaps this
information could feed into the publicly agreed upon function which
determines the value of bit gold based on its creation timestamp.
Gold created on any given date would have an agreed upon value (and cost)
which is a function of recent changes in aggregate labor.  This would
then expand the reserve money supply at just the required rate.
...[can't decrease the reserve commodity supply, is this a problem?]


me:

If an institution agrees to a specific formula to compute
the price, the demand curve (what the users of bit gold actually 
prefer) will diverge from the formula.  Since the supply curve 
is the same in either case (the cost of computing solution bits) 
the result is that the price of bit gold in an ex-institutional 
market will diverge from the institution's formula price.  The 
formula price will become either too low for many 
suppliers or too high for many customers, and so the
institution will be deserted by large populations in favor 
of the ex-institutional market.  (This being the Internet 
with strong crypto, I'm assuming the institution cannot 
enforce restrictions on ex-institutional trading).


The divergence will be small if demand for this commodity
is in fact, not just in theory, captured by the formula,
in this case dominated by the aggregate demand for 
labor.  I find it more likely that credit exposures in the
overall economy, and similarly exposures to uncertain
or inflated stock market prices, along with political 
conditions will dominate the demand side.  


This can be seen, in microcosm, in how the mints themselves will
use bit gold as a reserve commodity: the more reliable 
the redemption, the smaller the fractional reserve can be.
The credit exposure is a function of that fraction and the
expected evenness and reliability of redemption.  The more
uneven and less reliable the redemption is or is expected to be, 
the higher the reserve fractions must be, and so the more 
valuable bit gold itself becomes versus bit-gold-backed 
digital cash.  


In turn, demand for bit-gold-redeemable currency versus 
securities-redeemable currency will rise during periods when 
stocks and bonds are less reliable investments.  


There is no such thing as one "correct way"
to back a currency, nor is there any such thing as "money"
in its pure form -- everything is a barter good which
is more or less functional as an intermediating commodity.
The Internet will redefine currency diversity, from 
today's geographical diversity to diversity of currency issuing 
strategies. Such strategies will involve reserve backing ranging 
from the most ultimately secure, bit gold, to precious metals, 
to stocks and bonds, to "just trust us" and traditional 
legal tender laws (which however will remain geographically 
restricted and thus less relevant).


Bit gold, even more so than precious metals, will become a 
hedge and safe haven for preserving value in the face of credit 
and political exposures.  Such considerations reflect
both the reasons people usually give for buying precious metals,
and the role of bit gold as a more secure store of value when
other more productive investments become too risky.  When political
and credit exposures are small stocks, bonds, etc. give much higher 
returns. (Keep in mind also that one's political exposure often 
depends on who and where one is -- different users can have very 
different demand curves for bit gold).


That the price of bit gold will spike in times of
uncertainty reflects the normal preferences of 
investors for more productive investments which must however
be exposed to often unpredictable political and credit 
risks.  It also reflects the huge costs
entailed when credit breaches occur, and when political
events make business riskier.


This century's theories of money supply are so dominated by the 
central banking paradigm, that I suspect that paradigm even
creeps into some of the free banking literature.  An analysis which 
says that "the" money supply should follow a specific formula is
doomed.  From any source such analyses are obsolete when 
(a) stores of value which combines inherently
decentralized issue akin to precious metals mining with the 
high security and low transaction costs of online money, appear,
and/or (b) when there are a wide variety of different kinds of
currency in use in the same economy.  Academicians will
cease to care about the issue of "the" money supply because the 
central authorities they seek to influence will cease to have any 
control over it.  Instead there will be an industry, academic
or otherwise, in predicting the future relative prices
of currencies and reserve commodities for the purposes of 
speculation and arbitrage.


Hal Finney writes:

Bit gold has some of the properties of a commodity based money, like
gold; in particular, it has scarcity and requires expenditure of effort
to create more.  However it also has some of the properties of the fiat
currencies we use today, in that it has no intrinsic value.


me:

No value, utility, or function of a good is any more "intrinsic" than 
any other.  I hope this post, and in particular the concrete example 
below of Alice in Dictatoria, will demonstrate this.  The properties
of bit gold, especially verifiable scarcity, are sufficient to
fulfill the valuable function of a store of value.  There is high 
and historically persistent (albeit locally variable) demand for 
stores of value far more secure than stocks, bonds, real estate, etc.


We need friendly metaphors to communicate and market the system,
like goldsmiths crafting nice pieces of jewelry, but that's a 
different issue.


&gt;People desire gold, silver,
&gt;cigarettes and beads even when they are not used as money. 


There is extensive evidence that even the "decorative
function" of gold and silver evolved primarily from its 
verifiable scarcity, but it's not appropriate to go
into that at length on this list.  The point is most obvious 
in the case of diamonds, which from a purely aesthetic point 
of view are no more interesting than a wide variety of other gems 
or common materials.  


&gt;One is the startup problem. 


This is a problem for any new payment system: it requires
either a fully closed circuit of exchange, or frequent
exchange to and from other instruments.


Here's a minimal startup scenario:  Alice is being
persecuted in Dictatoria: she faces there imminent 
seizure of all her property.  Across the sea in
Freedonia lives her sister Barbara, whom she
can trust.  Alice does the following:


(1) Sells her property for the local currency
(2) Exchanges the local currency for bit gold
(3) Sends the bit gold over the Internet to Barbara
(4) Emigrates to Freedonia and gets her bit gold back
(5) Exchanges her bit gold for the currency of Freedonia.


If Dictatoria has very effective currency controls and
customs, Alice has no other alternative: use bit gold
or lose all of her property.  A more realistic 
assumption is that her next best alternative is diamonds: 
taking into account both the transaction costs of
diamonds (hard to verify exact value), and a probability of
being caught at customs, assume that she can expect to lose 
only 50% of the value of her property sales proceeds this way.

Alice is thus willing to pay up to 50% of the cost
of computing the bits, before bit gold becomes more
expensive than diamonds for saving her wealth. 
Equivalently, Alice is willing to use bit gold
if the currency exchange D$--&gt;bit gold--&gt;F$
is less than twice as expensive as the direct (but
forbidden) exchange D$--&gt;F$, due to bit gold
being so illiquid in Freedonia (i.e. its future
value being so heavily doubted) that one trade
is discounted by 50%.


If there are several Alices, it will be easy
for enterprising pairs of traders in Freedonia and
Dictatoria to recycle the bit gold back to Dictatoria.
These traders create a more liquid, less heavily
discounted market for bit gold for Alices and
Barbaras in Freedonia.  At the start, these
traders and the bit gold generators will be the
same self-trusting entity, and set up the whole system for
the Alices in Dictatoria. In the above bit gold vs. diamond 
scenario, it takes only two Alices to pay for the initial 
computation of the bit gold.  


Starting from such a desperate niche, further use of the
bit gold further amortizes the initial computation
costs, so that bit gold will spread quickly to less desparate
uses.


If there is a working and mostly trustworthy anonymous digital cash 
and communications mix system available both in Dictatoria and 
Freedonia, bit gold has much stiffer competition than diamonds 
for Alice's business.  In that case, bit gold might instead get 
started by several digital cash issuers agreeing to set up 
a secure free banking system in order to improve their 
trustworthiness.


Generation and collection of bit gold might also start up
in anticipation of the above needs, with immediate
motivation provided by the entertainment, status, etc. value 
of being early adopters of the most hi-tech collectables
in the world -- no licking of glue on dead trees here.
(Like the DigiCash Cyberbucks trial, Foresight Exchange, or 
the trading of Internet stocks. :-)


&gt;Second...Nick suggests that...pieces which were created
&gt;using expensive computational resources will be worth more than pieces
&gt;created using inexpensive resources.


The cost of the string is proportional to improbability of the
string.  We have empirical evidence that verifiably improbable 
documents, e.g. rare printing errors on postage stamps, become 
quite valuable -- the more rare and the more verifiable, the more 
valuable.  In gold the mining costs both limit current
supply and replacement cost, creating verifiable scarcity.


&gt;difficulty of mining does
&gt;not alter the value of a piece of gold,


Gold atoms do not come with verifiable timestamps, and so
unlike timestamped bit gold are treated as interchangeable.  
However, the overall cost of mining is the main long-term 
factor setting the overall supply curve of gold (versus the 
historically persistent but locally variable insecurity of 
other more productive investments setting the demand curve), 
and thus the price of gold.



&gt;...bit gold is not all interchangeable, which is
&gt;an unfortunate property for a form of money.


Also a property of diamonds and collectorable postage
stamps, so not at all unprecedented.


However, there are ways to normalize bits from different
dates.  The best way may be with an automated barter
exchange which lists all the different dates.  Automated
speculators all try to guess the relative scarcity between
the dates.  The result is a set of N prices between
N different dates, which imply the full \( N^{2} \) set of relative 
prices.  These are in turn used by mints to normalize bit 
strings of different dates, to create fungible units of 
reserve commodity.  (Similar mechanisms could normalize
different bit lengths and problem classes).


Other information which can help determine relative scarcity 
between dates:
-- amount produce on each date (measurable, since a public
property title database is a necessary part of the system)
-- computational costs of producing bits on each
date, as estimated by various authorities


The current price is determined by current demand and the
current estimated computational costs.  Normalization
creates a ceiling on the price of all bit gold, since
prices above computational cost incentivize production 
of new bit gold.  Normalization doesn't produce a minimum 
price for any current holders, since the interdate
exchange prices are relative, not absolute, and demand 
for all bit gold may slacken arbitrarily.  



Physically Comprehensive Machine Models


Computer as a graph, edges=wires, nodes=spheres
Layout = embedding of this graph onto a 3D Euclidean space
Speed of light --&gt; constant limit on propagation
Growth rate of computations



For bit gold we need a benchmark function whose upper
bound on common hardware (i.e. RAM-log) is within
a small factor (e.g. log(n)) of the lower bound for
any realizable machine model.  To prove this exists,
we need 


(a) a list of machine models which is comprehensive
of all physically realizable machines, in the sense
that any such machine can be simulated with a very small 
overhead, such as constant or O(log(n)), by some model on 
the list, and
(b) to prove lower bounds on a benchmark function for all 
models on the list



So I have probably too much research to do in these areas.
I might find that such a comprehensive list of
models does not exist and would be very difficult to 
draw up for some basic reasons?  However, I'm still 
interested in benchmark functions for their own sake, 
and finding matching upper and lower bounds for k&gt;=1 for 
any machine model.  If you're interested primarily in worst 
case, we can focus  our correspondence on that instead.


Secure Benchmark Functions

f: \(  \{0,1\}* --&gt; \{0,1\}* \) is called a strong k-benchmark function 
for machine model M and \( k &lt;= 1 \) if the following hold:
\begin{enumerate}
\item f is computable in \( O(p(n)) \) time on M, where p is a polynomial.
\item f does not shrink the input more than \( q(n,k) \), where \( q(n,k) \)
is a polynomial of degree k.
\item For every randomized algorithm A running on M in time
less than \( q(n,k)p(n) \), there exists an N such that for \( n &gt; N \)
	\( Pr[A(f(x)) = f^-1(f(x))] &lt; 1/q(n,k)p(n) \)
\end{enumerate}


In other words, there is no algorithm running faster
than \( q(n,k)p(n) \) which can invert f for more than a negligibly
small number of values. 


One can similarly define average-case, best-case, and worst-case
k-degree benchmark functions, analogously to one-way functions.
My question becomes, can one prove (3) as lower and upper bounds 
for some function and \( k &gt;= 1 \) on some realizable machine model such 
as RAM-log.


Strong and average case are most apropos to
my particular applications goal. 



Mildly One-Way Functions with Proven Tight Bounds

((Proven lower bounds with tight bounds))
\subsection{Tight Bounds on Constants}
\subsection{Candidate Benchmark Functions}
((Tight bounds on constants -- how to characterize or prove?))

Optimizing for Common Instructions

Requirements of Bit Gold
(( condense, a lot, my discussion with Larry White ))

Solution Event Ordering
((Need to securely order challenge solution events -- before
this event a solution cost $X per bit, after this event $Y, etc.))
((replicated timestamping server))
\subsection{Normalizing into Standard Bundles}

Warehouse: Property Titles to Costly Bits
((replicated property title server))
((store original bits vs. normalized bundles))

Intermint Clearing of Bit Gold Backed Digital Cash
((Free banking note clearing using bit gold warehouse))




Conclusion




References
[A90] Adams, Charles, For Good and Evil: The Impact of Taxes on Civilization 


[A98]  Tim Appenzeller, "Art: Evolution or Revolution?", Science 282(Nov 20, 1998), p. 1452. ].   See also the home page of 
Stanley Ambrose







Acknowledgements

Please send your comments to


&nbsp;







<!--
     FILE ARCHIVED ON 00:38:11 Apr 06, 2014 AND RETRIEVED FROM THE
     INTERNET ARCHIVE ON 13:18:09 Feb 26, 2026.
     JAVASCRIPT APPENDED BY WAYBACK MACHINE, COPYRIGHT INTERNET ARCHIVE.

     ALL OTHER CONTENT MAY ALSO BE PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT (17 U.S.C.
     SECTION 108(a)(3)).
-->
<!--
playback timings (ms):
  captures_list: 0.901
  exclusion.robots: 0.058
  exclusion.robots.policy: 0.042
  esindex: 0.017
  cdx.remote: 39.454
  LoadShardBlock: 325.843 (3)
  PetaboxLoader3.datanode: 196.454 (4)
  PetaboxLoader3.resolve: 158.13 (2)
  load_resource: 113.574
-->Bit Gold - Nick Szabo (December 29, 2005)

A long time ago I hit upon the idea of bit gold. The problem, in a nutshell, is that our money currently depends on trust in a third party for its value. As many inflationary and hyperinflationary episodes during the 20th century demonstrated, this is not an ideal state of affairs. Similarly, private bank note issue, while it had various advantages as well as disadvantages, similarly depended on a trusted third party.

Precious metals and collectibles have an unforgeable scarcity due to the costliness of their creation. This once provided money the value of which was largely independent of any trusted third party. Precious metals have problems, however. It's too costly to assay metals repeatedly for common transactions. Thus a trusted third party (usually associated with a tax collector who accepted the coins as payment) was invoked to stamp a standard amount of the metal into a coin. Transporting large values of metal can be a rather insecure affair, as the British found when transporting gold across a U-boat infested Atlantic to Canada during World War I to support their gold standard. What's worse, you can't pay online with metal.

Thus, it would be very nice if there were a protocol whereby unforgeably costly bits could be created online with minimal dependence on trusted third parties, and then securely stored, transferred, and assayed with similar minimal trust. Bit gold.

My proposal for bit gold is based on computing a string of bits from a string of challenge bits, using functions called variously "client puzzle function," "proof of work function," or "secure benchmark function." The resulting string of bits is the proof of work. Where a one-way function is prohibitively difficult to compute backwards, a secure benchmark function ideally comes with a specific cost, measured in compute cycles, to compute backwards.

Here are the main steps of the bit gold system that I envision:

1. A public string of bits, the "challenge string," is created (see step 5).
2. Alice on her computer generates the proof of work string from the challenge bits using a benchmark function.
3. The proof of work is securely timestamped. This should work in a distributed fashion, with several different timestamp services so that no particular timestamp service need be substantially relied on.
4. Alice adds the challenge string and the timestamped proof of work string to a distributed property title registry for bit gold. Here, too, no single server is substantially relied on to properly operate the registry.
5. The last-created string of bit gold provides the challenge bits for the next-created string.
6. To verify that Alice is the owner of a particular string of bit gold, Bob checks the unforgeable chain of title in the bit gold title registry.
7. To assay the value of a string of bit gold, Bob checks and verifies the challenge bits, the proof of work string, and the timestamp.

Note that Alice's control over her bit gold does not depend on her sole possession of the bits, but rather on her lead position in the unforgeable chain of title (chain of digital signatures) in the title registry.

All of this can be automated by software. The main limits to the security of the scheme are how well trust can be distributed in steps (3) and (4), and the problem of machine architecture which will be discussed below.

Hal Finney has implemented a variant of bit gold called RPOW (Reusable Proofs of Work). This relies on publishing the computer code for the "mint," which runs on a remote tamper-evident computer. The purchaser of bit gold can then use remote attestation, which Finney calls the transparent server technique, to verify that a particular number of cycles were actually performed.

The main problem with all these schemes is that proof of work schemes depend on computer architecture, not just an abstract mathematics based on an abstract "compute cycle." Thus, it might be possible to be a very low cost producer (by several orders of magnitude) and swamp the market with bit gold. However, since bit gold is timestamped, the time created as well as the mathematical difficulty of the work can be automatically proven. From this, it can usually be inferred what the cost of producing during that time period was.

Unlike fungible atoms of gold, but as with collector's items, a large supply during a given time period will drive down the value of those particular items. In this respect "bit gold" acts more like collector's items than like gold. However, the match between this ex post market and the auction determining the initial value might create a very substantial profit for the "bit gold miner" who invents and deploys an optimized computer architecture.

Thus, bit gold will not be fungible based on a simple function of, for example, the length of the string. Instead, to create fungible units dealers will have to combine different-valued pieces of bit gold into larger units of approximately equal value. This is analogous to what many commodity dealers do today to make commodity markets possible. Trust is still distributed because the estimated values of such bundles can be independently verified by many other parties in a largely or entirely automated fashion.

In summary, all money mankind has ever used has been insecure in one way or another. This insecurity has been manifested in a wide variety of ways, from counterfeiting to theft, but the most pernicious of which has probably been inflation. Bit gold may provide us with a money of unprecedented security from these dangers. The potential for initially hidden supply gluts due to hidden innovations in machine architecture is a potential flaw in bit gold, or at least an imperfection which the initial auctions and ex post exchanges of bit gold will have to address.
The Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterDonateToggle languageENOpen main menuThe Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterLibrary/Contracts with BearerLibraryContracts with BearerNick SzaboOriginally published in 1997External linkBearer Certificates
“Digital bearer certificate” is a broad term developed by this author[1] incorporating at least two emerging technologies: digital cash and distributed capabilities (secure distributed object references). I will first describe the Chaumian protocol and its innovative privacy feature. I will then discuss how these ideas map to the world of capabilities in the section on generic vs. specific rights. I have altered digital cash terminology from digital cash to bearer certificate or token, from mint to issuer or transfer agent, and so on to reflect the ability of Chaum’s protocols to generalize. Chaumian bearer certificates implement standardized rights transferable regardless of the identity of the holder. Each kind of contract (for example, each denomination of “coin” in digital cash) corresponds to a digital signature, just as each issue of Federal Reserve Notes or stock certificates corresponds to a particular plate.
In the most straightforward Chaumian protocol, the issuer and transfer agent (the same entity, for our purposes, though they can easily be unbundled) create a serial number (really a large unguessable random number, rather than a sequence), and append it to a list of issued certificates. The transfer agent clears a transfer (i.e., redeems the certificate) by checking the signature to identify the class of bearer contract and verify that it was made, then looking on that contract’s issued list to make sure the serial number is there, then removing the serial number. Alternatively, the issuer can let the issuee make up the serial number, then, when cleared, check the signature and put the number on the list of cleared certificates. The signature provides the assurance that the certificate is indeed the the particular kind of contract with bearer, while the serial number assures that the same instance of that contract is not cleared or redeemed more than once. In these simple versions, the transfer agent can link the transferee to the transferor for all transfers. To implement the privacy characteristics of coins and physical bearer certificates, we need to add unlinkability features.
Blind Signatures
Meet the greatest simple equation since e=mc2:
gSf(m) = S(m)
S is a digital signature. f is the blinding function, and g an unblinding function. The blinding functions are usually based on a secret random number called the “blinding factor”. m is another random number, a unique identifier which can, for example, refer to an instance of some object.
The idea is very clever but very simple. It may be counterintuitive because the simplest physical world metaphor of this highly useful e-commerce primitive sounds worse than useless: Alice can get Carol to sign a blank check! Here’s how:
Alice generates m and blinds it. “Blinding” is just a one-time-pad encryption to oneself, f(m). She sends this to Carol. This is like taking a piece of paper and sealing it inside an envelope which Carol can’t open or see through.
Carol signs it: Sf(m), and sends this back to Alice. This is like Carol signing the outside of the envelope.
Alice unblinds it: gSf(m) = S(m). Carol has also signed the paper Alice put inside the envelope!
The genius behind this discovery: cryptography guru David Chaum. The brilliance lies in step 3: Chaum discovered that some signatures have the property of being “commutative” with the blinding functions: Alice can strip off the blinding in the reverse order which the blinding and signature were applied, leaving just Alice’s signature of n. It is as if Alice put a piece of carbon paper inside the envelope!
In particular for RSA signatures, with public key (pq, e) and private key d, the blind signature functions are the following modulo pq:
S(x) = xd
g(x) = xk-1
f(x)= xke
We can check that the blind signature property holds: gSf(m) = (m(ke))d * k-1 = md * k * k-1 = md, which is the valid RSA signature of private key d on m.
Unlinkable Transfers
Distinguish between either a counter or third party tracing one person’s true name, via lack of or weak communications mix, and a third party linking two entities (whether nyms, use-more-than-once-addresses, account numbers, or true names) as being involved in the same transaction. By unlinkability herein we mean the latter. The goal where true names are used (this occurs, for example, when using true name accounts or not using good communications mixes), is to prevent third party linking of two people doing business with each other. Where nyms are used the goal is to minimize the release of traffic information, to prevent the unwanted accumulation of unique behavior patterns, which could be used to link nyms (including to their true names), or could augment other means of breaching privacy. Blinding especially helps where rights holders want to keep third party or public accounts denominated in generic rights. In that case a communications mix doesn’t even in principle give us what blinding does.
Besides protecting against the transfer agent, Chaum’s transferor-, transferee-, and double-blinding protocols protect against collusion of a party with a transfer agent to identify the countparty account or nym.
Unlinkability can be provided by combining a list of cleared certificates with blind signatures and a delay-mixing effect. Enough instances of a standardized contract are issued over a period of time to create a mix. Between the issuing and clearing of a certificate, many other certificates with the same signature will be cleared, making it highly improbable that a particular clearing can be linked to a particular issue via the signature. There is a tradeoff between the mixing effect and the exposure to the theft of a “plate” for a particular issue: the smaller the issue, the smaller the exposure but the greater the linkability; a larger issue has both greater exposure and greater confidentiality.
Blind signatures can be used to make certificate transfers unlinkable via serial number. Privacy from the transfer agent can take the form of transferee-unlinkability, transferor-unlinkability, or “double blinded” where both transferor and transferee are unlinkable by the transfer agent or a collusion of a transfer agent and counterparty.
A use-once-address communications mix plus foreswearing any reputation gain from keeping accounts, in theory also buys us unlinkability, but a communications mix is weak and very expensive.
Bearer certificates come in an “online” variety, cleared during every transfer, and thus both verifiable and observable, and an “offline” variety, which can be transferred without being cleared, but is only verifiable when finally cleared, by revealing any the clearing name of any intermediate holder who transferred the object multiple times (a breach of contract).
This unlinkability is often called “anonymity”, but the issue of whether accounts are issued to real names or pseudonyms, and whether transferor and transferee identify themselves to each other, is orthogonal to unlinkability by the transfer agent in the online model. In the off-line model, account identification (or at least a highly reputable and/or secured pseudonym) is required: passing an offline certificate a second time reveals this identity. Furthermore, communications channels can allow Eve to link transferor and transferee, unless they take the precaution of using an anonymous remailer. Online clearing does make lack of identification a reasonable option for many kinds of transactions, although common credit and warrantee situations often benefit from or even require identification.
When confronting an attempted clearing of a cleared serial number, we face an error-or-fraud dilemma similar to the one we encountered above in double entry bookkeeping. The ecash™ protocol from DigiCash actually takes advantage of on purpose to recover from a network failure. When certificates are lost over the net it is not clear to the transferor whether they have been received and cleared by the transferee or not. Second-transferring directly with the transfer agent resolves the ambiguity. This only works with the online protocol. The issue of distinguishing error from fraud is urgent in the offline protocol, but there is as yet no highly satisfactory solution. This problem is often intractable due to the subjectivity of intent.
With ideal two-way anonymous communications between use-once keys, and completely accountless clearing, unlinkability via blind signatures becomes redundant. This ideal case has yet to be even closely approached with implemented technology, and necessarily involves long communications delays which are often intolerable. Real imperfect communications mixes and less expensive blinded tokens complement each other.
Conserved Objects
Issuance and cleared transfer of references to a distributed object conserves the usage of that object. This object becomes “scarce” in economic terms, just as use of physical objects is finite. Conserved objects provide the basis for a software economics that more closely resembles economics of scarce physical objects. Conserved objects can be used to selectively exclude not only scarce physical resources (such as CPU time, network bandwidth and response time, etc.), but also fruits of intellectual labor – as long as one is willing to pay the price to interact with that information over the network rather than locally (cf. content rights management). Conservation immunizes objects and the resources they encapsulate to denial of service attacks. Bearer certificate protocols can be used to transfer references to a particular instance or set of instances of an object, just as they can be used to transfer other kinds of standardized rights.
To implement a full transaction of payment for services, we often need need more than just the digital cash protocol; we need a protocol that guarantees that service will be rendered if payment is made, and vice versa. Current commercial systems use a wide variety of techniques to accomplish this, such as certified mail, face to face exchange, reliance on credit history and collection agencies to extend credit, etc. I discuss such issues in my article on smart contracts.
Generic vs. Specific Rights
To discuss the mapping between Chaumian certificates and distributed capabilities as implemented in for example E I introduce some different, partly overlapping terminology: generic vs. specific, exclusive vs. non-, Transfer Agent vs. Provider, token vs. Swiss number.
Rights can be generic or specific. Generic rights correspond to a class of objects, specific rights to an instance. So a specific right is implemented with a Swiss number, a large random number. The signed numbers corresponding to generic rights I will call “tokens”.
Rights can also be exclusive or non-exlusive. Any object which must be conserved, or finally allocated to a specific user, is “exclusive”.
Simple example: the right to an exclusive lock on some 1 MB of memory is generic and exclusive. The right to an exclusive lock on the specific address space 100-101 is specific and exclusive. The right to two dozen particular stock quotes at 12:22 p.m. today is specific and non-exclusive.
The main motivation for these distinctions are different mechanisms of unlinkable transfer of these rights, set out below.
For simplicity generic rights are all “use-once”: the life cycle of a token consists of issuance, followed by a series of transfers, followed by consumption. More sophisticated life cycles, such as alternating transfer and consumption, are likely possible with some extra protocol.
With a perfect communications mix, including use-once return addresses, and no reputation building, we wouldn’t need blinded tokens. However, communications mixes are expensive, and we want the option of having certain public records by which to build reputations, yet do certain rights transfers privately. For these reasons, we should allow clients to blind token transfers in addition to providing a communications mix.
For inexpensive, unlinkable, and verifiable transfer of exclusive generic rights, using blinded tokens, there must be a signficant population of interchangable generic rights. Such rights bundled with nonexlusive specific rights can also be cheaply transferred since online clearing is not required for the latter. Unlinkable and verifiable transfer of exclusive specific rights seems to require online clearing via an expensive communications mix.
Two kinds of TTPs: a Transfer Agent (TA) and a Provider. The TA operates like an accountless digital cash mint, clearing the transfer of tokens for generic rights. Digital cash is a special case: money is the most generic of rights.
The Provider is responsible for actually holding the object, which can contain unique state. The Provider issues a Swiss number, or better a signed description of the specific right and its Swiss number. This signature allows offline verification of the nonexlusive right where the Provider is reputable. The TA issues a token for the corresponding generic rights.
Chaum has also developed other means for dealing with unique state[2].
I’m assuming the TA and Provider have known reputable signatures. The trust or reputation needed to ensure correctness of transfer between Provider, TA, and users is partly left for later analysis. The two main goals here are to assure that users can verify their rights (including exclusivity from transferors where promised) and retain full privacy from TAs and Providers. Some other trust assumptions are likely made here which need to be explicated and analyzed.
To implement exclusive transfers, the TA keeps a list of cleared (cancelled) token numbers. The TA corresponds to a “mint” in the Chaumian online digital cash protocol (see above). A class of generic rights corresponds to a “denomination” of coin. The Provider may also keep a list of outstanding or used Swiss numbers, like an E Registrar.
Here is another example of a generic right, or class of fungible objects: “A queriable SQL database with up to 10 MB of storage, and certain standard response time guarantees”.
The TA sees only classes of fungible objects. The Provider and users see particular instances with unique state, for example a database filled with unique information.
The Provider acts analogously to a “shop”. It is just another token client to the TA, which like other clients can transfer or receive tokens. Its special role is that it is responsible for issuance, where it tells the TA about a new instance, obtains a new token, and transfers it to the client to whom the new generic right is being issued. The TA generates and destroys token supply only at the behest of the Provider; otherwise all its transfers conserve the supply of a particular generic right. The Provider is also responsible for the delivery of service to the client bearing the promised right(s), at which time the Provider “deposits” the generic token(s), instructing the TA to decrement the token supply. In digital cash terminology, the Provider is the only entity which has to keep something like a bank account. Rights holders can also keep an account, if they wish to use it to help build reputation, or they can just use the TA for accountless conserved rights transfer.
The Provider issues along with the initial generic rights token a signed affadavit, machine or human readable, describing aspects of the object which may be non-exlusive and unique, along with that instance’s Swiss number and the public key(s) of the generic right(s) for which it is valid. For example, it might say “a database containing quotes of these two dozen listed stocks as of 12:22 pm Monday”, without actually containing those quotes. Often such description is worth more when bundled with generic exclusive rights, such as the right to a fast response time. The specific rights can elaborate in unique ways upon the generic rights, as long as these elaborations are not taken to define exclusive rights. The generic rights let the TAs garuntee exclusivity to users and conservation of resources to Providers, while the specific rights describe the unique state to any desired degree of elaboration. The Provider must be prepared to service any specific promise it has issued, as long as it is accompanied by the proper conserved generic tokens.
This method of composing specific and generic rights, transferred as a bundle but with exlusive generic atoms cleared by different TAs, allows arbitrarily sophisticated rights bundles, referring to objects with arbitrarily unique state, to be transferred unlinkably. A wide variety of derivatives and combinations are possible. The only restriction is that obtaining rights to specific exclusive resources must either be deferred to the consumption phase, or transferred with online clearing via expensive communications mix.
If the Provider wished to guarantee exclusivity to a specific right, transfer seems to require an expensive communications mix between Provider and transferee, rather than a cheap blinded token. For example, “Deep Space Station 60 from 0500-0900 Sunday” or “a lock on autoexec.bat now” demands exclusivity to a specific right, and thus seems to require a communications mix to unlinkably transfer. On the other hand, “A one hour block on DSS-60 in May” and “the right to lock autoexec.bat at some point” are generic and can be transferred privately with the much less expensive blinding, given a sufficient population of other tokens for this class of generic right transfered between the issuance and consumption of a given token.
Clients can deal with the TA without a communications mix. They deal with the Provider via a communications mix. If both the initial and final holders failed to do this, the Provider could link them. If just the final holder failed to do so, the Provider could identify him as the actual user of the resource. Thus for full privacy generic transfers are cheap, and nonexclusive transfers are cheap, while specific exsclusive transfers and actually using the object seem to require the expensive communications mix.
Acknowledgements
My thanks to David Chaum, Mark Miller, Bill Frantz, Norm Hardy, and many others for taking the time to give me their valuable insights into these issues.
References
The first public references to this idea can be found here, here. I also referred to this idea during this period in many personal communications, using the phrases &quot;digital bearer instrument&quot;, &quot;digital bearer certificate&quot;, &quot;scarce object&quot;, and &quot;conserved object&quot;. The idea of digital bearer certificates as a serious proposal for the financial industry has been popularized, with many intruiging additional ideas, by Bob Hettinga. ↩
David Chaum, Online Cash Checks ↩
&quot;Blind Signatures for Untraceable Payments,&quot; D. Chaum,
	Advances in Cryptology Proceedings of Crypto 82,
    D. Chaum, R.L. Rivest, &amp; A.T. Sherman (Eds.), Plenum, pp. 199-203.
The E distributed object language
Please send your comments to nszabo (at) law (dot) gwu (dot) edu
Copyright © 1997, 1999 by Nick Szabo
Permission to redistribute without alteration hereby grantedAboutContactPodcastsFeedNewsletterDonateGet involvedGitHubXNostrSatoshi Nakamoto InstituteEstablished block#272,311Satoshi Nakamoto Institute is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. Some works may be subject to other licenses.
The Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterDonateToggle languageENOpen main menuThe Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterLibrary/Money, Blockchains, and Social ScalabilityLibraryMoney, Blockchains, and Social ScalabilityNick SzaboFebruary 9, 2017External linkIntroduction
Blockchains are all the rage. The oldest and biggest blockchain of them all is Bitcoin, which over its eight-year history so far starshipped in value from 10,000 bitcoins per pizza (before there were exchanges that priced bitcoin in traditional currencies) to over 1,000 per bitcoin. As of this writing Bitcoin has a market capitalization of over 16 billion. Running non-stop for eight years, with almost no financial loss on the chain itself, it is now in important ways the most reliable and secure financial network in the world.
The secret to Bitcoin’s success is certainly not its computational efficiency or its scalability in the consumption of resources. Specialized Bitcoin hardware is designed by highly paid experts to perform only one particular function—to repetitively solve a very specific and intentionally very expensive kind of computational puzzle. That puzzle is called a proof-of-work, because the sole output of the computation is just a proof that the computer did a costly computation. Bitcoin’s puzzle-solving hardware probably consumes in total over 500 megawatts of electricity. And that is not the only feature of Bitcoin that strikes an engineer or businessman who is focused on minimizing resource costs as highly quixotic. Rather than reduce its protocol messages to be as few as possible, each Bitcoin-running computer sprays the Internet with a redundantly large number of “inventory vector” packets to make very sure that all messages get accurately through to as many other Bitcoin computers as possible. As a result, the Bitcoin blockchain cannot process as many transactions per second as a traditional payment network such as PayPal or Visa. Bitcoin offends the sensibilities of resource-conscious and performance-measure-maximizing engineers and businessmen alike.
Instead, the secret to Bitcoin’s success is that its prolific resource consumption and poor computational scalability is buying something even more valuable: social scalability. Social scalability is the ability of an institution—a relationship or shared endeavor, in which multiple people repeatedly participate, and featuring customs, rules, or other features which constrain or motivate participants’ behaviors—to overcome shortcomings in human minds and in the motivating or constraining aspects of said institution that limit who or how many can successfully participate. Social scalability is about the ways and extents to which participants can think about and respond to institutions and fellow participants as the variety and numbers of participants in those institutions or relationships grow. It’s about human limitations, not about technological limitations or physical resource constraints. There are separate engineering disciplines, such as computer science, for assessing the physical limitations of a technology itself, including the resource capacities needed for a technology to handle a greater number of users or a greater rate of use. Those engineering scalability disciplines are not, except by way of contrast with social scalability, the subject of this essay.
Even though social scalability is about the cognitive limitations and behavior tendencies of minds, not about the physical resource limitations of machines, it makes eminent sense, and indeed is often crucial, to think and talk about the social scalability of a technology that facilitates an institution. The social scalability of an institutional technology depends on how that technology constrains or motivates participation in that institution, including protection of participants and the institution itself from harmful participation or attack. One way to estimate the social scalability of an institutional technology is by the number of people who can beneficially participate in the institution. Another way to estimate social scalability is by the extra benefits and harms an institution bestows or imposes on participants, before, for cognitive or behavioral reasons, the expected costs and other harms of participating in an institution grow faster than its benefits. The cultural and jurisdictional diversity of people who can beneficially participate in an institution is also often important, especially in the global Internet context. The more an institution depends on local laws, customs, or language, the less socially scalable it is.
Without institutional and technological innovations of the past, participation in shared human endeavors would usually be limited to at most about 150 people—the famous “Dunbar number”. In the Internet era, new innovations continue to scale our social capabilities. In this article I will discuss how blockchains, and in particular public blockchains that implement cryptocurrencies, increase social scalability, even at a dreadful reduction in computational efficiency and scalability.
Cognitive capacity—here in the form of the relative size of a species’ neocortex—set limits on how large primate groups can be.  Maintaining animal or intimate human groups requires extensive emotional communications and investments in relationships, such as grooming in primates and gossiping, humor, story-telling, and other conversations, songs, and play in traditional human groups. Overcoming human cognitive limits to who or how many people can participate in an institution—the famous “Dunbar number” of around 150 people—requires institutional and technological innovation. (Source)
Innovations in social scalability involve institutional and technological improvements that move function from mind to paper or mind to machine, lowering cognitive costs while increasing the value of information flowing between minds, reducing vulnerability, and/or searching for and discovering new and mutually beneficial participants. Alfred North Whitehead said, “It is a profoundly erroneous truism, repeated by all copy-books and by eminent people when they are making speeches, that we should cultivate the habit of thinking what we are doing. The precise opposite is the case. Civilization advances by extending the number of important operations which we can perform without thinking about them.” Friedrich Hayek added: “We make constant use of formulas, symbols, and rules whose meaning we do not understand and through the use of which we avail ourselves of the assistance of knowledge which individually we do not possess. We have developed these practices and institutions by building upon habits and institutions which have proved successful in their own sphere and which have in turn become the foundation of the civilization we have built up.”
A wide variety of innovations reduce our vulnerability to fellow participants, intermediaries, and outsiders, and thereby lower our need to spend our scarce cognitive capacities worrying about how an increasingly large number of increasingly diverse people might behave. Another class of improvements motivates the accurate collection and transmission of valuable information between an increasing number and variety of participants. Yet other advances enable a wider number or variety of mutually beneficial participants can discover each other. All these kinds of innovations have over the course of human prehistory and history improved social scalability, sometimes dramatically so, making our modern civilization with its vast global population feasible. Modern information technology (IT), especially by making use of the historically recent discoveries of computer science, can often discover many more mutually beneficial matches, can improve motivations for information quality, and can reduce the need for trust within certain kinds of institutional transactions, with respect to an increasingly large number and variety of people, thereby further increasing social scalability in some very important ways.
Information flows between minds—what I have called intersubjective protocols—include spoken and written words, custom (tradition), the contents of law (its rules, customs, and case precedents), a variety of other symbols (e.g. “star” ratings common in online reputation systems), and market prices, among many others.
Trust minimization is reducing the vulnerability of participants to each other’s and to outsiders’ and intermediaries’ potential for harmful behavior. Most institutions which have undergone a lengthy cultural evolution, such as law (which lowers vulnerability to violence, theft, and fraud), as well as technologies of security, reduce, on balance, and in more ways than the reverse, our vulnerabilities to, and thus our needs to trust, our fellow humans, compared with our vulnerabilities before these institutions and technologies evolved. In most cases an often trusted and sufficiently trustworthy institution (such as a market) depends on its participants trusting, usually implicitly, another sufficiently trustworthy institution (such as contract law). These trusted institutions in turn traditionally implement a variety of accounting, legal, security, or other controls that make them usually and sufficiently, at least for facilitating the functionality of their client institutions, trustworthy, by minimizing vulnerability to their own participants (such as accountants, lawyers, regulators, and investigators). An innovation can only partially take away some kinds of vulnerability, i.e. reduce the need for or risk of trust in other people. There is no such thing as a fully trustless institution or technology.
The nonexistence of complete trustlessness is true even of our strongest security technology, encryption. Although some cryptographic protocols do guarantee certain specific data relationships with astronomically high probability against opponents with astronomically high computing power, they do not provide complete guarantees when accounting for all possible behaviors of all participants. For example, encryption can strongly protect an e-mail from direct eavesdropping by third parties, but the sender still trusts the recipient to not forward or otherwise divulge the contents of that email, directly or indirectly to any undesired third parties. As another example, in our strongest consensus protocols harmful behavior by certain fractions of participants or intermediaries well short of 100% (as measured by their computing power, stake-holding, or individuation and counting) can compromise the integrity of transactions or information flows between participants and thereby on balance harm the participants. The historically recent breakthroughs of computer science can reduce vulnerabilities, often dramatically so, but they are far from eliminating all kinds of vulnerabilities to the harmful behavior of any potential attacker.
Matchmaking is facilitating the mutual discovery of mutually beneficial participants. Matchmaking is probably the kind of social scalability at which the Internet has most excelled. Social networks like Usenet News, Facebook, and Twitter facilitate the mutual discovery of like-minded or otherwise mutually entertaining or mutually informing people (and even future spouses!). After they have allowed people more likely to be of mutual benefit to discover each other, social networks then facilitate relationships at various levels of personal investment, from casual to frequent to obsessive. Christopher Allen among others has done some interesting and detailed analyses about group size and time spent mutually interacting in online games and associated social networks.
eBay, Uber, AirBnB, and online financial exchanges have brought social scalability via often great improvements in commercial matchmaking: searching for, finding, bringing together, and facilitating the negotiation of mutually beneficial commercial or retail deals. These or related services also facilitate performances such as payment and shipping, as well as verification that other obligations undertaken by strangers in these deals have been performed and communication about the quality of such performances (as with “star rating” systems, Yelp reviews, and the like).
Whereas the main social scalability benefit of the Internet has been matchmaking, the predominant direct social scalability benefit of blockchains is trust minimization. A blockchain can reduce vulnerability by locking in the integrity of some important performances (such as the creation and payment of money) and some important information flows, and in the future may reduce the vulnerability of the integrity of some important matchmaking functions. Trust in the secret and arbitrarily mutable activities of a private computation can be replaced by verifiable confidence in the behavior of a generally immutable public computation. This essay will focus on such vulnerability reduction and its benefit in facilitating a standard performance beneficial to a wide variety of potential counterparties, namely trust-minimized money.
Money and Markets
Money and markets directly benefit the participants in each particular trade by the market matching a buyer with a mutually beneficial seller and by a widely acceptable and standardized counter-performance (money). I use markets here in the sense Adam Smith used the term: not as a specific place or service where buyers and sellers are brought together (although it might sometimes involve these), but rather the broad set of typically pairwise exchanges whereby the supply chain that makes a product is coordinated.
Money and markets also incentivize creation of more accurate price signals that reduce negotiation costs and errors for participants in other similar exchanges. The potent combination of money and market thereby allowed a far higher number and variety of participants to coordinate their economic activities than previous exchange institutions, which more resembled bilateral monopolies than competitive markets.
Markets and money involve matchmaking (bringing together buyer and seller), trust reduction (trusting in the self-interest rather than in the altruism of acquaintances and strangers), scalable performance (via money, a widely acceptable and reusable medium for counter-performance), and quality information flow (market prices).
The greatest early thinker about money and markets was Adam Smith. At the dawn of the industrial revolution in Britain, Smith observed in The Wealth of Nations how making even the most humble of products depended, directly and indirectly, on the work of large numbers of a wide variety of people:
Observe the accommodation of the most common artificer or day-laborer in a civilized and thriving country, and you will perceive that the number of people of whose industry a part, though but a small part, has been employed in procuring him this accommodation, exceeds all computation. The woolen coat, for example, which covers the day laborer, as coarse and rough as it may appear, is the produce of the joint labor of a great multitude of workmen. The shepherd, the sorter of the wool, the wool-comber or carder, the dyer, the scribbler, the spinner, the weaver, the fuller, the dresser, with many others, must all join their different arts in order to complete even this homely production. How many merchants and carriers, besides, must have been employed in transporting the materials from some of those workmen to others who often live in a very distant part of the country! How much commerce and navigation in particular, how many shipbuilders, sailors, sail makers, rope makers, must have been employed in order to bring together the different drugs made use of by the dyer, which often come from the remotest corners of the world! What a variety of labor, too, is necessary in order to produce the tools of the meanest of those workmen! To say nothing of such complicated machines as the ship of the sailor, the mill of the fuller, or even the loom of the weaver, let us consider only what a variety of labor is requisite in order to form that very simple machine, the shears with which the shepherd clips the wool. The miner, the builder of the furnace for smelting the ore, the feller of the timber, the burner of the charcoal to be made use of in the smelting-house, the brick maker, the brick layer, the workmen who attend the furnace, the millwright, the forger, the smith, must all of them join their different arts in order to produce them. Were we to examine, in the same manner, all the different parts of his dress and household furniture, the coarse linen shirt which he wears nest his skin, the shoes which cover his feet, the bed which he lies on, and all the different parts which compose it, the kitchen grate at which be prepares his victuals, the coals which he makes use of for that purpose, dug from the bowels of the earth, and brought to him perhaps by a long sea and a long land carriage, all the other utensils of his kitchen, all the furniture of his table, the knives and forks, the earthen or pewter plates upon which he serves up and divides his victuals, the different hands employed in preparing his bread and his beer, the glass window which lets in the heat and the light, and keeps out the wind and the rain, with all the knowledge and art requisite for preparing that beautiful and happy invention, without which these northern parts of the world could scarce have afforded a very comfortable habitation, together with the tools of all the different workmen employed in producing those different conveniences; if we examine, I say, all these things, and consider what a variety of labor is employed about each of them, we shall be sensible that without the assistance and co-operation of many thousands, the very meanest person in a civilized country could not be provided, even according to what we may falsely imagine the easy and simple manner in which he is commonly accommodated.
And this was before the many successive waves of industrial revolution and globalization between 1776 and now that refined, elaborated, and extended the division of labor many times more. Rather than trusting in the unlikely altruism of so many strangers, markets and money create many pairings of mutual benefit and thus motivate this large network of mutually oblivious people to act in our interests:
In civilized society man stands at all times in need of the cooperation and assistance of great multitudes, while his whole life is scarce sufficient to gain the friendship of a few persons…[In contrast to other animals,] man has an almost constant occasion for the help of his brethren, and it is vain for him to expect it from their benevolence only… [Exchange is the] manner in which we obtain from another the far greater part of those good offices which we stand in need of. It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard for their own interest.
Smith goes on to describe how division of labor, and thus labor productivity, depends on the extent of the network of pairwise exchanges: “As it is the power of exchanging that gives occasion to the division of labor, so the extent of this division must always be limited by the extent of that power, or, in other words, by the extent of the market”. As the exchange network around a country and around the globe grows, involving a greater number and variety of producers, so grows the division of labor and thereby labor productivity.
Money facilitates social scalability by increasing the opportunities for this exchange. By lowering coincidence problems (coincidence-of-wants in exchange and coincidence-of-want-and-event in unilateral transfers), via a widely acceptable and reusable form of wealth storage and transfer, money greatly lowered transaction costs, making possible more exchanges of a greater variety of goods and services involving exchanges and other wealth transfer relationships with a much larger number and much wider variety of people.
A wide variety of media, from oral language itself, clay, paper, telegraph, radio, and computer networks, have served to communicate offers, acceptances, and the resulting deals and prices, as well as performance monitoring and other business communications.
One of the most knowledgeable observations of the price network produced by markets and money can be found in Friedrich Hayek’s essay, “The Use of Knowledge in Society”:
In a system in which the knowledge of the relevant facts is dispersed among many people, prices can act to coordinate the separate actions of different people…in any society in which many people collaborate, this planning, whoever does it, will in some measure have to be based on knowledge which, in the first instance, is not given to the planner but to somebody else, which somehow will have to be conveyed to the planner. The various ways in which the knowledge on which people base their plans is communicated to them is the crucial problem for any theory explaining the economic process, and the problem of what is the best way of utilizing knowledge initially dispersed among all the people is at least one of the main problems of economic policy—or of designing an efficient economic system… The mere fact that there is one price for any commodity—or rather that local prices are connected in a manner determined by the cost of transport, etc.—brings about the solution which (it is just conceptually possible) might have been arrived at by one single mind possessing all the information which is in fact dispersed among all the people involved in the process… The marvel is that in a case like that of a scarcity of one raw material, without an order being issued, without more than perhaps a handful of people knowing the cause, tens of thousands of people whose identity could not be ascertained by months of investigation, are made to use the material or its products more sparingly; i.e., they move in the right direction….The price system is just one of those formations which man has learned to use (though he is still very far from having learned to make the best use of it) after he had stumbled upon it without understanding it. Through it not only a division of labor but also a coordinated utilization of resources based on an equally divided knowledge has become possible…a solution is produced by the interactions of people each of whom possesses only partial knowledge.
The Social Scalability of Network Security
Where long ago we used clay, and more recently paper, today programs and protocols running on our computers and data networks implement most of our commercial dealings. While this has greatly improved matchmaking and information flow, it has come at the cost of an increase in vulnerability to harmful behavior.
As networks grow, more people with fewer mutually understood habits of and constraints on behavior are added. Security via root-trusting access control, designed for small and chummy offices like Bell Labs where co-workers were well known and income and expenditures well controlled by paper procedures rather than performed on these office computers, breaks down as an efficient and effective security mechanism as organizations become larger, as organizational boundaries are crossed, and as more valuable and concentrated resources such as money are put on or activated via the computers. The more strangers one receives emails from, the more likely one is likely to get a phishing attack or a malware-laced attachment. Traditional computer security is not very socially scalable. As I describe in “The Dawn of Trustworthy Computing”:
When we currently use a smart phone or a laptop on a cell network or the Internet, the other end of these interactions typically run on other solo computers, such as web servers. Practically all of these machines have architectures that were designed to be controlled by a single person or a hierarchy of people who know and trust each other. From the point of view of a remote web or app user, these architectures are based on full trust in an unknown “root” administrator, who can control everything that happens on the server: they can read, alter, delete, or block any data on that computer at will. Even data sent encrypted over a network is eventually unencrypted and ends up on a computer controlled in this total way. With current web services we are fully trusting, in other words we are fully vulnerable to, the computer, or more specifically the people who have access to that computer, both insiders and hackers, to faithfully execute our orders, secure our payments, and so on. If somebody on the other end wants to ignore or falsify what you’ve instructed the web server to do, no strong security is stopping them, only fallible and expensive human institutions, which often stop at national borders.
Many server computers are not valuable enough for insiders or outsiders to attack. But an increasing number of others contain valuable concentrations of resources, motivating attack. Centralized root-trusting security scales poorly. As the resources controlled by computers become more valuable and more concentrated, traditional root-trusting security becomes more like the “call the cop” security we are used to in the physical world. Fortunately, with blockchains we can do much better for many of our most important computations.
Blockchains and Cryptocurrencies
Scalable markets and prices require scalable money. Scalable money requires scalable security, so that a greater number and variety of people can use the currency without losing its integrity against forgery, inflation, and theft.
An individual or group communicating under the name “Satoshi Nakamoto” brought Bitcoin to the Internet in 2009. Satoshi’s breakthrough with money was to provide social scalability via trust minimization: reducing vulnerability to counterparties and third parties alike. By substituting computationally expensive but automated security for computationally cheap but institutionally expensive traditional security, Satoshi gained a nice increase in social scalability. A set of partially trusted intermediaries replaces a single and fully trusted intermediary.
Financial controls on computational steroids: a blockchain as an army of robots, each checking up on each other’s work.
When we can secure the most important functionality of a financial network by computer science rather than by the traditional accountants, regulators, investigators, police, and lawyers, we go from a system that is manual, local, and of inconsistent security to one that is automated, global, and much more secure. Cryptocurrencies, when implemented properly on public blockchains, can substitute an army of computers for a large number of traditional banking bureaucrats. “These block chain computers will allow us to put the most crucial parts of our online protocols on a far more reliable and secure footing, and make possible fiduciary interactions that we previously dared not do on a global network.” (Source)
The characteristics most distinctively valuable in blockchain technology in general, and Bitcoin in particular — for example
independence from existing institutions for its basic operations
ability to operate seamlessly across borders
come from the high levels of security and reliability a blockchain can maintain without human intervention. Without that high security it’s just a gratuitously wasteful distributed database technology still tied to the local bureaucracies it would have to depend upon for its integrity.
Since the mid-20th century computing has increased in efficiency by many orders of magnitude, but humans are using the same brains. This has created plenty of possibility for overcoming human limitations, and institutions based solely on human minds, with computational capabilities, including in security, doing what they do best, with human minds doing what they still do best. As a result, humans have no more raw mental ability to scale up our institutions than we ever have. But there is plenty of potential for improving social scalability by replacing some human functions with computational ones. (An important note—this argument depends on the slope, not the absolute position, of the human ability line. The absolute position shown above is arbitrary and depends on what human “computation” we are measuring).
A new centralized financial entity, a trusted third party without a “human blockchain” of the kind employed by traditional finance, is at high risk of becoming the next Mt. Gox; it is not going to become a trustworthy financial intermediary without that bureaucracy.
Computers and networks are cheap. Scaling computational resources requires cheap additional resources. Scaling human traditional institutions in a reliable and secure manner requires increasing amounts accountants, lawyers, regulators, and police, along with the increase in bureaucracy, risk, and stress that such institutions entail. Lawyers are costly. Regulation is to the moon. Computer science secures money far better than accountants, police, and lawyers.
In computer science there are fundamental security versus performance tradeoffs. Bitcoin’s automated integrity comes at high costs in its performance and resource usage. Nobody has discovered any way to greatly increase the computational scalability of the Bitcoin blockchain, for example its transaction throughput, and demonstrated that this improvement does not compromise Bitcoin’s security.
It is probable that no such big but integrity-preserving performance improvement is possible for the Bitcoin blockchain; this may be one of these unavoidable tradeoffs. Compared to existing financial IT, Satoshi made radical tradeoffs in favor of security and against performance. The seemingly wasteful process of mining is the most obvious of these tradeoffs, but Bitcoin also makes others. Among them is that it requires high redundancy in its messaging. Mathematically provable integrity would require full broadcast between all nodes. Bitcoin can’t achieve that but to even get anywhere close to a good approximation of it requires a very high level of redundancy. So a 1 MB block consumes far more resources than a 1 MB web page, because it has to be transmitted, processed, and stored with high redundancy for Bitcoin to achieve its automated integrity.
These necessary tradeoffs, sacrificing performance in order to achieve the security necessary for independent, seamlessly global, and automated integrity, mean that the Bitcoin blockchain itself cannot possibly come anywhere near Visa transaction-per-second numbers and maintain the automated integrity that creates its distinctive advantages versus these traditional financial systems. Instead, a less trust-minimized peripheral payment network (possibly Lightning) will be needed to bear a larger number of lower-value bitcoin-denominated transactions than Bitcoin blockchain is capable of, using the Bitcoin blockchain to periodically settle with one high-value transaction batches of peripheral network transactions.
Bitcoin supports a lower rate transactions than Visa or PayPal, but due to its stronger automated security these can be much more important transactions. Anybody with a decent Internet connection and a smart phone who can pay 0.20-2 transaction fees—substantially lower than current remittance fees—can access Bitcoin any where on the globe. Lower value transactions with lower fees will need to be implemented on peripheral bitcoin networks.
When it comes to small-b bitcoin, the currency, there is nothing impossible about paying retail with bitcoin the way you’d pay with a fiat currency — bitcoin-denominated credit and debt cards, for example, with all the chargeback and transactions-per-second capabilities of a credit or debit card. And there are also clever ways to do peripheral bitcoin retail payments in which small value payments happen off-chain and are only periodically bulk-settled on the Capital-B Bitcoin blockchain. That blockchain is going to evolve into a high-value settlement layer as bitcoin use grows, and we will see peripheral networks being used for small-b bitcoin retail transactions.
When I designed bit gold I already knew consensus did not scale to large transaction throughputs securely, so I designed it with a two-tier architecture: (1) bit gold itself, the settlement layer, and (2) Chaumian digital cash, a peripheral payment network which would provide retail payments with high transactions-per-second performance and privacy (through Chaumian blinding), but would like Visa be a trusted third party and thus require a “human blockchain” of accountants, etc. to operate with integrity. The peripheral payment network can involve only small value transactions, thereby requiring much less of a human army to avoid the fate of Mt. Gox.
Ralph Merkle: pioneer of public-key cryptography and inventor of hierarchical hash-tree structures (Merkle trees).
Money requires social scalability in its design, via security. For example it should be very hard for any participant or intermediary to forge money (to dilute the supply curve leading to undue or unexpected inflation). Gold can have value anywhere in the world and is immune from hyperinflation because its value doesn’t depend on a central authority. Bitcoin excels at both these factors and runs online, enabling somebody in Albania to use Bitcoin to pay somebody in Zimbabwe with minimal trust in or and no payment of quasi-monopoly profits to intermediaries, and with minimum vulnerability to third parties.
There are all sorts of definitions of “blockchain” out there, almost all of them just implicitly broad hand-waving amid the mountains of marketing hype. I suggest a clear definition that can be communicated to lay people. It is a blockchain if it has blocks and it has chains. The “chains” should be Merkle trees or other cryptographic structures with a similar integrity functionality of post-unforgeable integrity. Also the transactions and any other data whose integrity is protected by a blockchain should be replicated in a way objectively tolerant to worst-case malicious problems and actors to as high a degree as possible (typically the system can behave as previously specified up to a fraction of 1/3 to 1/2 of the servers maliciously trying to subvert it to behave differently).
Bitcoin’s socially scalable security, based on computer science rather than on police and lawyers, allows, for example, customers in Africa to pay suppliers in China seamlessly across borders. A private blockchain cannot accomplish this feat nearly as easily, since it would require an identification scheme, certificate authority, and PKI shared between these various jurisdictions. (Source)
Because of this fraction, and because of the (hopefully very rare) need to update software in a manner that renders prior blocks invalid—an even riskier situation called a hard fork—blockchains also need a human governance layer that is vulnerable to fork politics. The most successful blockchain, Bitcoin, has maintained its immutable integrity via decentralized decision-making among experts in the technology combined with a strong dogma of immutability, under which only the most important and rare bug fixes and design improvements, that cannot be made any other way, justify a hard fork. Under this philosophy of governance accounting or legal decisions (such as altering an account balance or undoing a transaction) never justify a hard fork, but should be accomplished by traditional governance outside of (or on top of) the system (e.g. via a court injunction forcing a Bitcoin user to send a new transaction that effectively undoes the old one, or confiscating the particular keys and thus the particular holdings of a particular user).
To say that data is post-unforgeable or immutable means that it can’t be undetectably alteredafter being committed to the blockchain. Contrary to some hype this doesn’t guarantee anything about a datum’s provenance, or its truth or falsity, before it was committed to the blockchain. That requires additional protocols, often including expensive traditional controls. Blockchains don’t guarantee truth; they just preserve truth and lies from later alteration, allowing one to later securely analyze them, and thus be more confident in uncovering the lies. Typical computers are computational etch-a-sketch, while blockchains are computational amber. Important data should be committed to blockchain amber as early as possible, ideally directly from and cryptographically signed by the device in which it was generated, to maximize the blockchain’s benefit in securing its integrity.
A Merkle tree of four transactions (tx0 through tx3). Combined with a proper replication and chains of transaction blocks protected by proof-of-work, Merkle trees can make data such as transactions post-unforgeable by consensus. In Bitcoin, a Merkle root hash securely summarizes and is used to verify the unaltered state of all the transactions in a block.
My own 1998 “secure property title” architecture had Merkle trees and replication of data tolerant against an objective fraction of arbitrarily faulty software or malicious actors, but not blocks. It demonstrated my theory that you could protect the integrity of globally shared data and transactions, and use that ability to design a cryptocurrency (bit gold). It did not have the more efficient and computationally scalable blocks-and-ledger system that Bitcoin does. Also like today’s private blockchains, secure property titles assumed and required securely distinguishable and countable nodes.
Given the objective 51% hashrate attack limit to some important security goals of public blockchains like Bitcoin and Ethereum, we actually do care about the distinguishable identity of the most powerful miners to answer the question “can somebody convince and coordinate the 51%?
Blockchain security is objectively limited and blockchain governance is heavily influenced by the potential for a 51% attack. An attack of course does not have to be called an “attack” by the attackers; instead they might call it “enlightened governance” or “democracy in action”. Indeed some kinds of software updates needed to fix bugs or otherwise improve the protocol require a soft fork. Some other kinds of software updates require hard forks, which in Bitcoin pose an even greater security and continuity risks than soft forks. Blockchains, although reducing trust far more than any other network protocols, are still far from trustless. Miners are partially trusted fiduciaries, and those who are not expert developers or computer scientists who have invested a great deal of time in learning the design principles and codebase of a blockchain must place a great deal of faith in the expert developer community, much as non-specialists who want to understand the results of a specialized science do of the corresponding scientists. During a hard fork exchanges can also be very influential by deciding which fork to support with their order books and trade symbol continuity.
Public blockchains thus mostly but not entirely dodge the identity-is-hard bullet and take care of its remaining problem of identifying the most powerful miners at a higher “wet”/“social” level, where it is probably more appropriate, rather than trying to securely map such an inherently wet (brain-based) concept onto the protocol, as PKI (public key infrastructure) rather awkwardly tries to do.
So I think some of the “private blockchains” qualify as bona fide blockchains; others should go under the broader rubric of “distributed ledger” or “shared database” or similar. They are all very different from and not nearly as socially scalable as public and permissionless blockchains like Bitcoin and Ethereum.
All of the following are very similar in requiring an securely identified (distinguishable and countable) group of servers rather than the arbitrary anonymous membership of miners in public blockchains. In other words, they require some other, usually far less socially scalable, solution to the Sybil (sockpuppet) attack problem:
Private blockchains
The “federated” model of sidechains (Alas, nobody has figured out how to do sidechains with any lesser degree of required trust, despite previous hopes or claims). Sidechains can also be private chains, and it’s a nice fit because their architectures and external dependencies (e.g. on a PKI) are similar.
Multisig-based schemes, even when done with blockchain-based smart contracts
Threshold-based “oracle” architectures for moving off-blockchain data onto blockchains
The dominant, but usually not very socially scalable, way to identify a group of servers is with a PKI based on trusted certificate authorities (CAs). To avoid the problem that merely trusted third parties are security holes, reliable CAs themselves must be expensive, labor-intensive bureaucracies that often do extensive background checks themselves or rely on others (e.g. Dun and Bradstreet for businesses) to do so. (I once led a team that designed and built such a CA). CAs also act as a gatekeeper, rendering these permissioned systems. CAs can become singular points of political control and failure. “Public blockchains are automated, secure, and global, but identity is labor-intensive, insecure, and local.”
PKI-enabled private blockchains are a nice for banks and some other large enterprises because they already have mature in-house PKIs that cover the employees, partners, and private servers needed to approve important transactions. Bank PKIs are relatively reliable. We also have semi-reliable CAs for web servers, but not generally speaking for web clients, even though people have been working on the problem of client certificates since the invention of the web: for example advertisers would love to have a more secure alternative to phone numbers and cookies for tracking customer identities. Yet it hasn’t happened.
PKI can work well for some important things and people but it is not nearly so nice or so easy for lesser entities. Its social scalability is limited by the traditional wet identity bureaucracy on which it depends.
Some significant thefts in the broader bitcoin ecosystem. Whereas the Bitcoin blockchain itself is probably the most secure financial network in existence (and indeed must remain far more secure than traditional payment networks in order to maintain its low governance costs and seamless cross-border capability), its peripheral services based on older centralized web servers are very insecure. (Source: author)
We need more socially scalable ways to securely count nodes, or to put it another way to with as much robustness against corruption as possible, assess contributions to securing the integrity of a blockchain. That is what proof-of-work and broadcast-replication are about: greatly sacrificing computational scalability in order to improve social scalability. That is Satoshi’s brilliant tradeoff. It is brilliant because humans are far more expensive than computers and that gap widens further each year. And it is brilliant because it allows one to seamlessly and securely work across human trust boundaries (e.g. national borders), in contrast to “call-the-cop” architectures like PayPal and Visa that continually depend on expensive, error-prone, and sometimes corruptible bureaucracies to function with a reasonable amount of integrity.
Conclusion
The rise of the Internet as seen the rise of a variety of online institutions, among them social networks, “long-tail” retail (e.g. Amazon), and a variety of services that allow small and dispersed buyers and sellers to find and do business with each other (eBay, Uber, AirBnB, etc.) These are just the initial attempts to take advantage of our new abilities. Due to the massive improvements in information technology over recent decades, the number and variety of people who can successfully participate in an online institution is far less often restricted by the objective limits of computers and networks than it is by limitations of mind and institution that have usually have not yet been sufficiently redesigned or further evolved to take advantage of those technological improvements.
These initial Internet efforts have been very centralized. Blockchain technology, which implements data integrity via computer science rather than via “call the cops”, has so far made possible trust-minimized money—cryptocurrencies—and will let us make progress in other financial areas as well as other areas where transactions can be based primarily on data available online.
This is not to say that adapting our institutions to our new capabilities will be easy, or indeed in particular cases anything short of difficult and improbable. Utopian schemes are very popular in the blockchain community, but they are not viable options. Reverse-engineering our highly evolved traditional institutions, and even reviving in new form some old ones, will usually work better than designing from scratch, than grand planning and game theory. One important strategy for doing so was demonstrated by Satoshi—sacrifice computational efficiency and scalability—consume more cheap computational resources—in order to reduce and better leverage the great expense in human resources needed to maintain the relationships between strangers involved modern institutions such as markets, large firms, and governments.AboutContactPodcastsFeedNewsletterDonateGet involvedGitHubXNostrSatoshi Nakamoto InstituteEstablished block#272,311Satoshi Nakamoto Institute is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. Some works may be subject to other licenses.
The Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterDonateToggle languageENOpen main menuThe Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterLibrary/Secure Property Titles with Owner AuthorityLibrarySecure Property Titles with Owner AuthorityNick SzaboOriginally published in 1998External linkThe advent of writing greatly improved the tracking of property rights, and indeed gave rise to our modern systems of property rights and law. However, written records have proven to be quite vulnerable to abuse. A common pattern during eras of political instability or oppression has been the confiscation of land via the forgery or destruction of public records. Reconstruction from informal records, such as residency recorded in phone books, even when possible is costly and fraught with error and potential for fraud[1]. Large amounts of, in some areas most, property in developing countries is not formally titled[2]. Even during eras of political stability in developed countries, there occur many expensive problems with titles.[3] Straightforward transcription of written records into a centralized online repository would make many of these problems even worse – electronic records can be highly vulnerable to loss and forgery, and insiders are the most common source of such attacks. This paper proposes a secure, distributed title database to prevent such attacks against property rights in the future.
Many kinds of Internet resources have a basic characteristic: users must agree on their control across trust boundaries. A big example is names. The article “Names: Decentralized, Secure, Human-Meaningful: Choose Two” dismisses not only the ubiquity and importance of this problem, but also the possibility of solution.[4] Instead petnames are proposed. These are at best mere mnemonics to translate human-readable into cryptographic names; petnames don’t do anything to secure naming across trust boundaries. All three attributes – decentralized, secure, and human-meaningful – must be provided if people are to communicate and be communicated about securely over the Internet, and this paper along with the article Advances in Distributed Security shows how to provide all three.
More generally, we show how to implement transferable global rights, enforced entirely by protocol, to names, attributions, bit gold, and similar purely informatic property owned by a particular entity but possessed and relied upon by the public, and how to implement a secure title database for other kinds of property. For a particular example of cross-trust-boundary rights enforced entirely by protocol, see my proposal for name integrity in cross-trust-boundary file systems.
In all cases of property rights there is a defined space, whether a namespace or physical space, and the task is to agree on simple attributes of or rights to control subdivisions of that space. In some cases a name or other symbol corresponds to a person or object owned or controlled by that person. For example, Internet users must agree on which domain name corresponds to which web site operator. In other cases we are simply concerned with control over a subdivision of the space. With real estate we must agree on who owns various rights (to occupy the surface, to mine the minerals under, etc.) to a piece of land. With radio spectrum we must agree on who owns what range of frequencies and in what physical space (or transmitting power as an easily observed approximation of physical space used).
It is the author’s hypothesis that all such agreements of control, including control over the semantics of symbols, to be made and respected across trust boundaries are problems of agreeing on and maintaining property rights. Thus the results of this paper are far more general than they might first appear – I believe this paper provides a solution to secure namespaces and similar problems as well as the problem of securely recording agreements on traditional property rights. Highlighting the property rights nature of public directories also highlights the limitations of these mappings – for example that names, addresses, and other symbols whose semantics are controlled by a person can often be delegated, just as property can be given or rented.
New advances in replicated database technology will give us the ability to securely maintain and transfer ownership for a wide variety of kinds of property, including not only land but chattels, securities, names, and addresses. This technology will give us public records which can “survive a nuclear war”, along the lines of the original design goal of the Internet. While thugs can still take physical property by force, the continued existence of correct ownership records will remain a thorn in the side of usurping claimants.
I use political words in this essay as metaphors to describe how our hypothetical property title software, and especially its protocol for distributing the title database across a public network, could work. A group, called a property club, gets together on the Internet[5] and decides to keep track of the ownership of some kind of property. The property is represented by titles: names referring to the property, and the public key corresponding to a private key held by its current owner, signed by the previous owner, along with a chain of previous such titles. Title names may “completely” describe the property, for example allocations in a namespace. (Of course, names always refer to something, the semantics, so such a description is not really complete). Or the title names might simply be labels referring to the property. Various descriptions and rules – maps, deeds, and so on – may be included.
The property club can be thought of as a “microgovernment”, an entity that performs globally and independently one narrow function normally associated with government. In particular it is a “constitutional microdemocracy” with low entry and exit costs. After the rules of property transfer have been decided, each vote should stay within this constitution – so that normally the vote will simply implement a distributed operation according to the property rules. The voting is necessary not due to a democratic political ideology but because it is the optimal result in analysis of distributed databases with malicious attackers.[6] If the rules are violated by the winning voters, the correct losers can exit the group and reform a new group, inheriting the old titles. Users of the titles (relying parties) who wish to maintain correct titles can securely verify for themselves which splinter group has correctly followed the rules and switch to the correct group. If the rules are violated by losing voters, they can be excluded from further participation both by correct winners and rule-following relying parties.
This voting-or-reformation method works well where exit costs are low. Thus in practice users should not “put all their eggs in one basket”, but different title clubs should be used for different kinds of property. Note that the key security feature of the club is not the voting, but a set of objective, often automated, rules and an unforgeable audit trail that allows both club members and relying parties to check whether each vote followed the rules. So, to go further with the political metaphor, a property club is a “constitutional microdemocracy” with most of the emphasis on the “constitutional”. The voting is necessary, but is quite regulated.
To implement a property club, we set up a replicated database so that the club members, hereafter “servers”, can securely maintain titles of ownership, and securely transfer them upon the request of current owners. Actually getting end users to respect the property rights agreed upon by this system will be dependent on the specific nature of the property, and is beyond the scope of the current inquiry. The purpose of the replicated database is simply to securely agree on who owns what. The entire database is public.
The ideal title database would have the following properties:
Current owner Alice should be able transfer her title to only a single relying counterparty (similar to the “double spending” problem in digital cash)
Servers should not be able to forge transfers
Servers should not be able to block transfers to or from politically incorrect parties.
We cannot achieve ideals (1) and (3), so we introduce “voting” as follows. A good model of secure replicated databases is the “Byzantine Quorum System” of Malkhi &amp; Reiter[6]. In contrast to most recent work in peer-to-peer software, our design is based on mathematical proofs of security rather than hand-waving. For a short discussion of such threshold-of-servers approaches, see my essay “Coalition Design for Secure Protocols”. The database is replicated across a universe of servers U, |U|=n. The “quorum system” is a collection of subsets (quora) of these servers, each pair of which intersect. Each quorum can operate on behalf of the system; intersection guarantees that operations done on distinct quora preserve consistency. A quorum system tolerant of Byzantine (unconditionally malicious) server failures is a collection of subsets of servers, each pair of which intersect in a set containing sufficiently many correct servers to guarantee the consistency of the replicated data. The authors construct a protocol such that any intersection contains at least 2f+1 servers, thus providing resilience against up to f malicious servers, n &gt; 4f.
Using these results it looks like we can approach our ideal title database as follows:
Alice signs the title and Bob’s public key, and sends this message to 2f+1 servers, committing her to transfer title to Bob. Bob checks at least 2f+1 servers before relying on Alice’s transfer.
No collusion of servers can forge Alice’s signature (we achieve at least this property ideally!)
A conspiracy of &gt;=(1/4)n servers can block a transfer. Alice’s only recourse is to use some other channels to broadcast her intention, demonstrating that the registry did not follow her wishes, and hoping the alternative channels are more reliable. Bob only has similar recourse if he signed a document with Alice demonstrating their intentions to transfer title from Alice to Bob. The most basic recourse is a correct subset of servers which exits the property club and establishes a new one, then advertises its correctness (and proves the incorrectness of its rival group) as described above.
Sharing control over property, for example as security for a loan, could be accomplished by sharing the private key corresponding to the current owner’s public key. Possession of this private key is required to sign over title; multiparty threshold signatures could also be handled. So it may be a good idea to use one keypair for each combination of title and current owner, rather than keypairs representing the identities of owners. When certain contractual conditions are met, such as the last payment on a loan, this could trigger the generation of a new keypair held solely by the owner, and transfer of title from the shared keypair to the new keypair.
Divisibility and Homesteading
The initial allocations might occur by mapping existing property rights from their current institutional incarnation, or by using traditional methods of staking and negotiating mutual recognition of claims. Some methods less dependent on an existing legal regime for the rights will be discussed in this section.
For some kinds of allocation, such as spatial regions or a hierarchical namespace, we wish to be able to subdivide and re-merge properties. Current owner Alice should be able to transfer various fractional portions of her title to multiple single relying counterparties. One possibility is to have “divide” or “merge” messages whereby the current owner of a property can retire the old property specifications(s) and link them to new property spec(s), the whole message being signed by the owner. Then the new property spec(s) are introduced and considered active, and the old ones considered deactivated. It would be the responsibility subsequent transferees to ensure that the new specifications do not intersect, and are otherwise in good order.
One way to approach the homesteading, or initial allocation, problem, I call the “emergent respect” style: Alice claims the entire unallocated universe. Bob also claims it, the same property spec under a different digital signature. They then may choose to subdivide, sell, give away, etc. property. Each conflicting root grows like a tree into an allocation of all property.
How to resolve trees with conflicting roots? Eventually, the thugs, mechanisms, or informal agreements which enforce property rights converge on a particular tree as the standard, proper allocation. Roots who give away more property to more people, or who actually deploy mechanisms to protect their property, will gain more respect for the tree they started.
In a namespace, conflicts may be resolved by giving names to the conflicting roots, and keeping track of those name-subtree mappings as property.
Usurpers may be able to steal property by setting up their own root and enforcing it, but they can’t delete the alternative allocations. The history is always there as evidence for claims.
Those with no firsthand knowledge of conflicting claims may resolve them by consulting authorities, and weighing the opinions of these authorities according to trust metrics, similar to trust metrics sometimes used for public key certificates.
With secure timestamps, homesteading could be done on a first-come rather than emergent respect basis.
Adverse Possession
For some kinds of property we might want to add the right of adverse possession, or formalized squatting. Here’s one general way to implement a kind of adverse possession:
Transfers must be securely timestamped.
Transfers expire. To maintain ownership, the owner must issue a new transfer to self before expiration.
Upon expiration, the property may be homestead on a first-come or emergent respect basis.
This method doesn’t attempt to define or utilize a state of “disuse”. Instead it equates activity of the property with the ongoing active online presence of an owner who knows about the title and wishes to continue ownership. Cost of maintaining the title might be made high by requiring a periodic registry fee from owners. However, this introduces the problem of who obtains the benefit, by property club rules, of the profits from this fee, and the problem of that the fee lowers the profit of owning the property, even perhaps making it negative. One possibility, where costs of protecting the property are high, is to charge a “Georgian tax” based on some imprecise but objective estimate of the value potential of the property, and allocate the fees to the task of securing the property. To come up with this estimate, or to account for usage of the property itself, would involve mechanisms or observation of characteristics specific to the kind of property, to which subject we now turn.
Correspondence to Ground
Largely unaddressed above is the problem of divergence between actual conditions and directory rights. For example, squatters might legitimately, in the eyes of most property rights enforcers, occupy and improve unused land which a title registry indicates is owned by others. De Soto[2] describes squatters and emergent property rights on the American frontier and today’s developing world. When names are property, a name may violate a pre-existing trademark, causing the confusion that both the new namespace and the old trademark namespace were designed to solve.
When divergence becomes too great, a solution to address the unreality of the title registry is needed. One such solution is for the squatters to set up their own rival registry, and then prove the superior correspondence of their registry to actual reality over control and use of the resources. Another solution for squatters is to use the adverse possession mechanism described above – but this works only if the cost of maintaining the title is sufficiently high.
Another solution is to examine the incentives of the titled owner, to see if they correspond to truthfully claiming control over a resource. In most cases there may be incentive to lie, and we can’t use this method. In some cases there is incentive to tell the truth and we can, with caveats, rely on it. Any such incentive assumption in the property rules should be explicated, so that relying parties can examine whether the conditions creating the incentive still hold.
Another solution is for property club rules and the registry to originally incorporate rich information about the actual state of property, and modify the actual ownership and transfer on this property based on that state, in a way that leaves few ambiguities so it can be fully audited by club members and third parties. It is most advantageous when this auditing can remain automated, as envisioned above. However the introduction as rule criteria of unrecorded (or unsecurely recorded) transient states common in physical property causes auditing, and thus the titles, to become both less secure and more expensive.
Acknowledgements
My thanks to Gregory Burch, J.D., Eileen O’Connor, J.D., Melora Svoboda, and many others for their helpful comments.
References
Kelly McCollum, &quot;Using Phone Books, Scholars Build a Data Base for Resettling Kosovars&quot; ↩
Hernando de Soto, The Mystery of Capital ↩ ↩
Reasons to buy title insurance ↩
Bryce &quot;Zooko&quot; Wilcox, Names: Decentralized, Secure, Human-Meaningful: Choose Two ↩
Property on the Internet may take all kinds of new forms. For analysis one recently emerged form, the ownership of open source software projects, see Eric Raymond, &quot;Homesteading the Noosphere&quot;. ↩
Malkhi &amp; Reiter, &quot;Byzantine Quorum Systems&quot;, STOC97 ↩ ↩
Please send your comments to nszabo (at) law (dot) gwu (dot) edu
Copyright © 1998,1999,2002,2005 by Nick Szabo
Permission to redistribute without alteration hereby grantedAboutContactPodcastsFeedNewsletterDonateGet involvedGitHubXNostrSatoshi Nakamoto InstituteEstablished block#272,311Satoshi Nakamoto Institute is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. Some works may be subject to other licenses.
The Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterDonateToggle languageENOpen main menuThe Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterLibrary/Shelling Out: The Origins of MoneyLibraryShelling Out: The Origins of MoneyNick SzaboOriginally published in 2002External linkAbstract
The precursors of money, along with language, enabled early modern humans to solve problems of cooperation that other animals cannot – including problems of reciprocal altruism, kin altruism, and the mitigation of aggression. These precursors shared with non-fiat currencies very specific characteristics – they were not merely symbolic or decorative objects.
Table of Contents
Money
Collectibles
Evolution, Cooperation, and Collectibles
Gains From Wealth Transfers
Starvation Insurance
Kin Altruism Beyond the Grave
The Family Trade
The Spoils of War
Disputes and Remedies
Attributes of Collectibles
Conclusion
References
Acknowledgements
Money
From the very start, England’s 17th century colonies in America had a problem – a shortage of coins.[D94][T01] The British idea was to grow large amounts of tobacco, cut timber for the ships of their global navy and merchant marine, and so forth, sending in return the supplies they felt were needed to keep the Americans working. In effect, early colonists were supposed to both work for the company and shop at the company store. The investors and the Crown much preferred this to paying in coin what the farmers might ask, letting the farmers themselves buy the supplies – and, heaven forbid, keep some of the profit as well.
The colonists’ solution was at hand, but it took a few years for them to recognize it. The natives had money, but it was very different from the money Europeans were used to. American Indians had been using money for millennia, and quite useful money it turned out to be for the newly arrived Europeans – despite the prejudice among some that only metal with the faces of their political leaders stamped on it constituted real money. Worse, the New England natives used neither silver nor gold. Instead, they used the most appropriate money to be found in their environment – durable skeleton parts of their prey. Specifically, they used wampum, shells of the clam Venus mercenaria and its relatives, strung onto pendants.
Necklace of wampum. During trade the beads were counted, removed, and re-assembled on new necklaces. Native American shell beads were also sometimes woven into belts or other mnemonic and ceremonial devices that demonstrated the wealth and commitment of a tribe to a treaty.
Clams were found only at the ocean, but wampum traded far inland. Sea-shell money of a variety of types could be found in tribes across the American continent. The Iriquois managed to collect the largest wampum treasure of any tribe, without venturing anywhere near the clam’s habitat.[D94] Only a handful of tribes, such as the Narragansetts, specialized in manufacturing wampum, while hundreds of other tribes, many of them hunter-gatherers, used it. Wampum pendants came in a variety of lengths, with the number of beads proportional to the length. Pendants could be cut or joined to form a pendant of length equal to the price paid.
Once they got over their hangup about what constitutes real money, the colonists went wild trading for and with wampum. Clams entered the American vernacular as another way to say “money”. The Dutch governor of New Amsterdam (now New York) took out a large loan from an English-American bank – in wampum. After a while the British authorities were forced to go along. So between 1637 and 1661, wampum became legal tender in New England. Colonists now had a liquid medium of exchange, and trade in the colonies flourished.[D94]
The beginning of the end of wampum came when the British started shipping more coin to the Americas, and Europeans started applying their mass-manufacturing techniques. By 1661, British authorities had thrown in the towel, and decided it would pay in coin of the realm – which being real gold and silver, and its minting audited and branded by the Crown, had even better monetary qualities than shells. In that year wampum ceased to be legal tender in New England. In 1710 it briefly became legal tender in North Carolina. It continued to be used as a medium of exchange, in some cases into the 20th century – but its value had been inflated one hundred fold by Western harvesting and manufacturing techniques, and it gradually went the route that gold and silver jewelry had gone in the West after the invention of coinage – from well-crafted money to decoration. The American language of shell money became a quaint holdover – “a hundred clams” became “a hundred dollars”. “Shelling out” came to mean paying in coins or bills, and eventually by check or credit card.[D94] Little did we know that we had touched the very origins of our species.
Collectibles
Native American money took many forms besides shells. Furs, teeth, and a variety of other objects with properties we will discuss below were also commonly used as media of exchange. 12,000 years ago, in what is now Washington state, the Clovis people developed some marvelously long chert blades. The only problem – they break far too easily. They were useless for cutting. The flints were being made “for the sheer enjoyment” – or for some other purpose that had nothing to do with cutting.[G01] As we shall see, this seeming frivolity was, quite likely, actually very important to their survival.
Native Americans had not, however, been the first to make artful but useless blades, nor had they invented shell money. Nor, for that matter, had Europeans, even though they, too, in ages past had widely used shells and teeth for money – not to mention cattle, gold, silver, weapons, and much else. Asians had used all that and faux axes issued by governments to boot, but they as well imported this institution. For archaeologists have found pendants of shells dating to the early Paleolithic that could easily have substituted for Native American money.
Beads made from shells of the pea-sized snail Nassarius kraussianus, that lived in a nearby estuary. Blombos Cave, South Africa, 75,000 B.P.[B04]
In the late 1990s archaeologist Stanley Ambrose discovered, in a rock-shelter in the Rift Valley of Kenya, a cache of beads made of ostrich eggshell, blanks, and shell fragments. They are dated using the argon-argon (40Ar/39Ar) ratio to at least 40,000 years old.[A98] Pierced animal teeth have been found in Spain also dating to this time.[W95] Perforated shells have also been recovered from early Paleolithic sites in Lebanon.[G95] Recently regular shells, prepared as strung beads and dating further back still, to 75,000 BP, have been found in Blombos Cave in South Africa.[B04]
Ostrich-eggshell beads, Kenya Rift Valley, 40,000 B.P. (Courtesy Stanley Ambrose)
Our modern subspecies had migrated to Europe and necklaces of shell and tooth appear there, from 40,000 B.P. onward. Shell and tooth pendants appear in Australia from 30,000 B.P. onward.[M93] In all cases, the work is highly skilled, indicating a practice that probably dates much further back in time. The origin of collecting and decorating is quite likely Africa, the original homeland of the anatomically modern subspecies. Collecting and making necklaces must have had an important selection benefit, since it was costly – manufacture of these shells took a great deal of both skill and time during an era when humans lived constantly on the brink of starvation.[C94]
Practically all human cultures, even those that do not engage in substantial trade or that use more modern forms of money, make and enjoy jewelry, and value certain objects more for their artistic or heirloom qualities than for their utility. We humans collect necklaces of shells and other kinds of jewelry – for the sheer enjoyment of it. For the evolutionary psychologists an explanation that humans do something for “the sheer enjoyment of it” is not an explanation at all – but the posing of a problem. Why do so many people find the collection and wearing of jewelry enjoyable? For the evolutionary psychologist, this question becomes – what caused this pleasure to evolve?
Detail of necklace from a burial at Sungir, Russia, 28,000 BP. Interlocking and interchangeable beads. Each mammoth ivory bead may have required one to two hours of labor to manufacture.[W97]
Evolution, Cooperation, and Collectibles
Evolutionary psychology starts with a key mathematical discovery of John Maynard Smith.[D89] Using models of populations of co-evolving genes, from the well-developed area of population genetics, Smith posited genes that can code for strategies, good or bad, used in simple strategic problems (the “games” of game theory). Smith proved that these genes, competing to be propagated into future generations, will evolve strategies that are Nash equilibria to the strategic problems presented by the competition. These games include the prisoner’s dilemma, a prototypical problem of cooperation, and hawk/dove, a prototypical problem of aggression and its mitigation.
Critical to Smith’s theory is that these strategic games, while played out between phenotypes proximately, are in fact games between genes at the ultimate level – the level of competition to be propagated. The genes – not necessarily the individuals – influence behavior as if they were boundedly rational (coding for strategies as optimal as possible, within the limits of what phenotypes can express given the biological raw materials and previous evolutionary history) and “selfish” (to use Richard Dawkins’ metaphor). Genetic influences on behavior are adaptations to the social problems presented by genes competing through their phenotypes. Smith called these evolved Nash equilibria evolutionary stable strategies.
The “epicycles” built on top of the earlier individual selection theory, such as sexual selection and kin selection, disappear into this more general model which, in a Copernican manner, puts the genes rather than individuals at the center of the theory. Thus Dawkins’ metaphorical and often misunderstood phrase, “selfish gene”, to describe Smith’s theory.
Few other species cooperate on the order of even Paleolithic humans. In some cases – brood care, the colonies of ants, termites, and bees, and so forth, animals cooperate because they are kin – because they can help copies of their “selfish genes” found in their kin. In some highly constrained cases, there is also ongoing cooperation between non-kin, which evolutionary psychologists call reciprocal altruism. As Dawkins describes it,[D89] unless an exchange of favors is simultaneous (and sometimes even then), one party or the other can cheat. And they usually do. This is the typical result of a game theorists call the Prisoner’s Dilemma – if both parties cooperated, both would be better off, but if one cheats, he gains at the expense of the sucker. In a population of cheaters and suckers, the cheaters always win. However, sometimes animals come to cooperate through repeated interactions and a strategy called Tit-for-Tat: start cooperating and keep cooperating until the other party cheats – then defect yourself. This threat of retaliation motivates continued cooperation.
The situations where such cooperation in fact occurs in the animal world are highly constrained. The main constraint is that such cooperation is restricted to relationships where at least one of the participants is more or less forced to be in the proximity of the other. The most common case is when parasites, and hosts whose bodies they share, evolve into symbiotes. If the interests of the parasite and the host coincide, so that both working together would be more fit than either on their own, (i.e. the parasite is also providing some benefit to the host), then, if they can play a successful game of Tit-for-Tat, they will evolve into symbiosis – a state where their interests, and especially the exit mechanism of genes from one generation to the next, coincides. They become as a single organism. However, there is much more than cooperation going on here – there is also exploitation. They occur simultaneously. The situation is analogous to an institution humans would develop – tribute – which we will analyze below.
Some very special instances occur that do not involve parasite and host sharing the same body and evolving into symbiotes. Rather, they involve non-kin animals and highly constrained territory. A prominent example Dawkins describes is cleaner fish. These fish swim in and out of the mouths of their hosts, eating the bacteria there, benefiting the host fish. The host fish could cheat – it could wait for the cleaner to finish its job, then eat it. But they don’t. Since they are both mobile, they are both potentially free to leave the relationship. However, the cleaner fish have evolved a very strong sense of individual territoriality, and have stripes and dances that are difficult to spoof – much like a difficult to forge brand logo. So the host fish know where to go to get cleaned – and they know that if they cheat, they will have to start over again with a new distrustful cleaner fish. The entrance costs, and thus the exit costs, of the relationship are high, so that it works out without cheating. Besides, the cleaner fish are tiny, so the benefit of eating them is not large compared to the benefit of a small number of, or even one, cleaning.
One of the most pertinent examples.is the vampire bat. As their name suggests, they suck the blood of prey mammals. The interesting thing is that, on a good night, they bring back a surplus; on a bad night, nothing. Their dark business is highly unpredictable. As a result, the lucky (or skilled) bats often share blood with the less lucky (or skilled) bats in their cave. They vomit up the blood and the grateful recipient eats it.
The vast majority of these recipients are kin. Out of 110 such regurgitations witnessed by the strong-stomached biologist G.S. Wilkinson, 77 were cases of mothers feeding their children, and most of the other cases also involved genetic kin. There were, however, a small number that could not be explained by kin altruism. To demonstrate these were cases of reciprocal altruism, Wilkinson combined the populations of bats from two different groups. Bats, with very rare exceptions, only fed old friends from their original group.[D89] Such cooperation requires building a long-term relationship, where partners interact often, recognize each other, and keep track of each other’s behavior. The bat cave helps constrain the bats into long-term relationships where such bonds can form.
We will see that some humans, too, chose highly risky and discontinuous prey items, and shared the resulting surpluses with non-kin. Indeed, they accomplished this to a far greater extent than the vampire bat. How they did so is the main subject of our essay. Dawkins suggests, “money is a formal token of delayed reciprocal altruism”, but then pursues this fascinating idea no further. We will.
Among small human groups, public reputation can supersede retaliation by a single individual to motivate cooperation in delayed reciprocation. However, reputational beliefs can suffer from two major kinds of errors – errors of about which person did what, and errors in appraising the value or damages caused by that act.
The need to remember faces and favors is a major cognitive hurdle, but one that most humans find relatively easy to overcome. Recognizing faces is easy, but remembering that a favor took place when such memory needs to be recalled can be harder. Remembering the specifics about a favor that gave it a certain value to the favored is harder still. Avoiding disputes and misunderstandings can be improbable or prohibitively difficult.
The appraisal or value measurement problem is very broad. For humans it comes into play in any system of exchange – reciprocation of favors, barter, money, credit, employment, or purchase in a market. It is important in extortion, taxation, tribute, and the setting of judicial penalties. It is even important in reciprocal altruism in animals. Consider monkeys exchanging favors – say pieces of fruit for back scratches. Mutual grooming can remove ticks and fleas that an individual can’t see or reach. But just how much grooming versus how many pieces of fruit constitutes a reciprocation that both sides will consider to be “fair”, or in other words not a defection? Is twenty minutes of backscratching worth one piece of fruit or two? And how big a piece?
Even the simple case of trading blood for blood is more complicated than it seems. Just how do the bats estimate the value of blood they have received? Do they estimate the value of a favor by weight, by bulk, by taste, by its ability to satiate hunger, or other variables? Just the same, measurement complications arise even in the simple monkey exchange of “you scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours”.
For the vast majority of potential exchanges, the measurement problem is intractable for animals. Even more than the easier problem of remembering faces and matching them to favors, the ability of both parties to agree with sufficient accuracy on an estimate of the value of a favor in the first place is probably the main barrier to reciprocal altruism among animals.
Just the stone tool-kit of even early Paleolithic man that has survived for us to find was in some ways too complicated for brains of our size. Keeping track of favors involving them – who manufactured what quality of tool for whom, and therefore who owed whom what, and so on – would have been too difficult outside the boundaries of the clan. Add onto that, quite likely, a large variety of organic objects, ephemeral services (such as grooming), and so on that have not survived. After even a small fraction of these goods had been transferred and services performed our brains, as inflated as they are, could not possibly keep track of who owed what to whom. Today we often write these things down – but Paleolithic man had no writing. If cooperation occurred between clans and even tribes, as the archaeological record indicates in fact occurred, the problem gets far worse still, since hunter-gatherer tribes were usually highly antagonistic and mutually distrustful.
If clams can be money, furs can be money, gold can be money, and so on – if money is not just coins or notes issued by a government under legal tender laws, but rather can be a wide variety of objects – then just what is money anyway? And why did humans, often living on the brink of starvation, spend so much time making and enjoying those necklaces when they could have been doing more hunting and gathering? Nineteenth-century economist Carl Menger[M1892] first described how money evolves naturally and inevitably from a sufficient volume of commodity barter. In modern economic terms the story is similar to Menger’s.
Barter requires a coincidence of interests. Alice grows some pecans and wants some apples; Bob grows apples and want some pecans. They just happen to have their orchards near each other, and Alice just happens to trust Bob enough to wait between pecan harvest time and apple harvest time. Assuming all these conditions are met, barter works pretty well. But if Alice was growing oranges, even if Bob wanted oranges as well as pecans, they’d be out of luck – oranges and apples don’t both grow well in the same climate. If Alice and Bob didn’t trust each other, and couldn’t find a third party to be a middleman[L94] or enforce a contract, they’d also be out of luck.
Further complications could arise. Alice and Bob can’t fully articulate a promise to sell pecans or apples in the future, because, among other possibilities, Alice could keep the best pecans to herself (and Bob the best apples), giving the other the dregs. Comparing the qualities as well as the quantities of two different kinds of goods is all the more difficult when the state of one of the goods is only a memory. Furthermore, neither can anticipate events such as a bad harvest. These complications greatly add to the problem of Alice and Bob deciding whether separated reciprocal altruism has truly been reciprocal. These kinds of complications increase the greater the time interval and uncertainty between the original transaction and the reciprocation.
A related problem is that, as engineers would say, barter “doesn’t scale”. Barter works well at small volumes but becomes increasingly costly at large volumes, until it becomes too costly to be worth the effort. If there are n goods and services to be traded, a barter market requires n^2 prices. Five products would require twenty-five prices, which is not too bad, but 500 products would require 250,000 prices, which is far beyond what is practical for one person to keep track of. With money, there are only n prices – 500 products, 500 prices. Money for this purpose can work either as a medium of exchange or simply as a standard of value – as long as the number of money prices themselves do not grow too large to memorize or change too often. (The latter problem, along with an implicit insurance “contract”, along with the lack of a competitive market may explain why prices were often set by long-evolved custom rather than proximate negotiation).
Barter requires, in other words, coincidences of supply or skills, preferences, time, and low transaction costs. Its cost increases far faster than the growth in the number of goods traded. Barter certainly works much better than no trade at all, and has been widely practiced. But it is quite limited compared to trade with money.
Primitive money existed long before large scale trade networks. Money had an even earlier and more important use. Money greatly improved the workings of even small barter networks by greatly reducing the need for credit. Simultaneous coincidence of preference was far rarer than coincidences across long spans of time. With money Alice could gather for Bob during the ripening of the blueberries this month, and Bob hunt for Alice during the migration of the mammoth herds six months later, without either having to keep track of who owed who, or trust the other’s memory or honesty. A mother’s much greater investment in child-rearing could be secured by gifts of unforgeable valuables. Money converts the division of labor problem from a prisoner’s dilemma into a simple swap.
The proto-money used by many hunter-gatherer tribes looks very different from modern money, now serves a different role in our modern culture, and had a function probably limited to small trade networks and other local institutions discussed below. I will thus call such money collectibles instead of money proper. The terms used in the anthropological literature for such objects are usually either “money”, defined more broadly than just government printed notes and coins but more narrowly than we will use “collectible” in this essay, or the vague “valuable”, which sometimes refers to items that are not collectibles in the sense of this essay. Reasons for choosing the term collectible over other possible names for proto-money will become apparent. Collectibles had very specific attributes. They were not merely symbolic. While the concrete objects and attributes valued as collectible could vary between cultures, they were far from arbitrary. The primary and ultimate evolutionary function of collectibles was as a medium for storing and transferring wealth. Some kinds of collectibles, such as wampum, could be quite functional as money as we moderns know it, where the economic and social conditions encouraged trade. I will occasionally use the terms “proto-money” and “primitive money” interchangeably with “collectible” when discussing pre-coinage media of wealth transfer.
Gains From Wealth Transfers
People, clans or tribes trade voluntarily because both sides believe they gain something. Their beliefs about the value may change after the trade, for example as they gain experience with the good or service. Their beliefs at the time of the trade, although to some degree inaccurate as to the value, are still usually correct as to the existence of gain. Especially in early intertribal trade, restricted to high-value items, there was strong incentive for each party to get their beliefs right. Thus trade almost always did benefit both parties. Trade created value as much as the physical act of making something.
Because individuals, clans, and tribes all vary in their preferences, vary in their ability to satisfy these preferences, and vary in the beliefs they have about these skills and preferences and the objects that are consequent of them, there are always gains to be made from trade. Whether the costs of making these trades – transaction costs – are low enough to make the trades worthwhile is another matter. In our civilization, far more trades are possible than were through most of human history. Nevertheless, as we shall see some kinds of trades were worth more than the transaction costs, for some cultures, probably back to the beginning of homo sapiens sapiens.
Voluntary spot trades are not the only kinds of transactions that benefit from lower transaction costs. This is the key to understanding the origin and evolution of money. Family heirlooms could be used as collateral to remove the credit risk from delayed exchanges. The ability of a victorious tribe to extract tribute from the vanquished was of great benefit to the victor. The victor’s ability to collect tribute benefited from some of the same kinds of transaction cost techniques as did trade. So did the plaintiff in assessment of damages for offenses against custom or law, and kin groups arranging a marriage. Kin also benefited from timely and peaceful gifts of wealth by inheritance. The major human life events that modern cultures segregate from the world of trade benefited no less than trade, and sometimes more so, from techniques that lowered transaction costs. None of these techniques was more effective, important, or early than primitive money – collectibles.
When H. sapiens sapiens displaced H. sapiens neanderthalensis, population explosions followed. Evidence from the takeover in Europe, c. 40,000 to 35,000 B.P, indicates that H. sapiens sapiens increased the carrying capacity of its environment by a factor of ten over H. sapiens neanderthalensis – i.e., the population density increased tenfold.[C94] Not only that, the newcomers had spare time to create the world’s first art – such as the wonderful cave paintings, a wide variety of well-crafted figurines – and of course the wonderful pendants and necklaces of seashells, teeth, and eggshell.
These objects were not useless decorations. Newly effective wealth transfers, made possible by collectibles as well as another probable advance of the era, language, created new cultural institutions that quite likely played the leading role in the increase of carrying capacity.
The newcomers, H. sapiens sapiens, had the same size brain, weaker bones, and smaller muscles than the Neanderthals. Their hunting tools were more sophisticated, but in 35,000 B.P. they were basically the same tools – they were probably not even twice as effective, much less ten times more effective.  The biggest difference may have been wealth transfers made more effective or even possible by collectibles. H. sapiens sapiens took pleasure from collecting shells, making jewelry out of them, showing them off, and trading them. H. sapiens neanderthalensis did not. The same dynamic would have been at work, tens of thousands of years earlier, on the Serengeti, when H. sapiens sapiens first appeared in that dynamic maelstrom of human evolution, Africa.
We shall describe how collectibles lowered transaction costs in each kind of wealth transfer – in the voluntary free gift of inheritance, in voluntary mutual trade or marriage, and in the involuntary transfers of legal judgments and tribute.
All these kinds of value transfer occurred in many cultures of human prehistory, probably from the beginning of Homo sapiens sapiens. The gains to be made, by one or both parties, from these major life event transfers of wealth, were so great that they occurred despite high transaction costs. Compared to modern money, primitive money had a very low velocity – it might be transferred only a handful of times in an average individual’s lifetime. Nevertheless, a durable collectible, what today we would call an heirloom, could persist for many generations and added substantial value at each transfer – often making the transfer even possible at all. Tribes therefore often spent large amounts of time on the seemingly frivolous tasks of manufacturing and exploring for the raw materials of jewelry and other collectibles.
The Kula Ring
The Kula trading network of pre-colonial Melanesia. The kula valuables doubled as &quot;high power&quot; money and mnemonic for stories and gossip. Many of the goods traded, mostly agricultural products, were available in different seasons, and so could not be traded in kind. Kula collectibles solved this double-coincidence problem as an unforgeably costly, wearable (for security), and circulated (literally!) money. Necklaces circulated clockwise, and armshells counter-clockwise, in a very regular pattern. By solving the double-coincidence problem an armshell or necklace would prove more valuable than its cost after only a few trades, but could circulate for decades. Gossip and stories about prior owners of the collectibles further provided information about upstream credit and liquidity. In other Neolithic cultures collectibles, usually shells, circulated in a less regular pattern but had similar purposes and attributes.[L94]
Kula armshell (mwali).
Kula necklaces (bagi).
For any institution in which wealth transfer is an important component, we will ask the following questions:
What coincidence in time between the event, the supply for the transferred good, and demand for the transferred good was necessary? How unlikely or how high a barrier to the wealth transfer did the improbability of coincidence represent?
Would the wealth transfers formed a closed loop of collectibles just based on that institution, or were other wealth transfer institutions necessary to complete circulation cycles? Taking the actual flow graph of monetary circulation seriously is critical to understanding the emergence of money. General circulation among a wide variety of trades did not and would not exist for most of human prehistory. Without completed and repeated loops collectibles would not circulate and would become worthless. A collectible, to be worth making, had to add value in enough transactions to amortize its cost.
We shall first examine the kind of transfer most familiar and economically important to us today – trade.
Starvation Insurance
Bruce Winterhalder[W98] surveys models of how and why food is sometimes transferred between animals: tolerated theft, producing/scrounging/opportunism, risk-sensitive subsistence, by-product mutualism, delayed reciprocity, trade/exchange not in kind, and other selection models (including kin altruism). Here we focus on risk-sensitive subsistence, delayed reciprocity, and trade (exchange not in kind). We argue that substituting trade of food for collectibles for delayed reciprocity can increase food sharing. It does so by mitigating the risks of a variable food supply while avoiding the largely insurmountable problems of delayed reciprocity between bands. We will deal with kin altruism and theft (tolerated or not) in broader contexts below.
Food is worth far more to starving people than to well-fed ones. If the starving man can save his life by trading his most precious valuables, it may be worth to him months or even years of the labor it might take to replace that value. He will usually consider his life worth more than the sentimental value of the family heirlooms. Like fat itself, collectibles can provide insurance against food shortages. Starvation from local shortages could be staved off with at least two different kinds of trades – for the food itself, or for foraging or hunting rights.
Nevertheless, the transaction costs were usually too high – bands were far more likely to fight than ever trust each other. The hungry band that couldn’t find its own food usually starved. However, if the transaction costs could be lowered, by lowering the need for trust between bands, food that was worth a day’s labor to one band might be worth several months’ labor to the starving band.
Local but extremely valuable trade was, this essay argues, made possible among many cultures by the advent of collectibles, by the time of the Upper Paleolithic. Collectibles substituted for otherwise necessary but non-existent trusting long term relationships. If there had existed a high degree of sustained interaction and trust between tribes, or individuals of different tribes, so that they gave each other unsecured credit, this would have stimulated time-lagged barter trade. However, such a high degree of trust then is highly implausible – for the reasons stated above regarding reciprocal altruism, confirmed by the empirical evidence that most hunter-gatherer tribal relations have been observed to be quite antagonistic. Hunter-gatherer bands usually broke up into small bands for most of the year and gathered into “aggregates”, something like medieval European fairs, for a few weeks out of the year. Despite the lack of trust between bands, an important trade in staples, of the kind illustrated in the accompanying figure, almost surely occurred in Europe and probably elsewhere, such as with the big game hunters of America and Africa.
The scenario illustrated by the accompanying figure is hypothetical, but it would be very surprising if it did not occur. While many Europeans even in the Paleolithic enjoyed wearing shell necklaces, many lived farther inland and made necklaces instead out of the teeth of their prey. Flints, axes, furs, and other collectibles were also quite likely used as media of exchange.
Reindeer, bison, and other human prey migrated at different times of the year. Different tribes specialized in different prey, to the point where over 90%, and sometimes as much as 99%, of the remains from many sites during the Paleolithic in Europe come from a single species.[C94] This indicates at least seasonal specialization and perhaps full-time specialization by a tribe in a single species. To the extent they specialized, the members of a single tribe would have become experts at the behavior, migration habits, and other patterns surrounding their specific prey species, as well as the specialized tools and techniques for hunting them. Some tribes observed in recent times are known to have specialized. Some North American Indian tribes specialized respectively in hunting bison, antelope, and fishing for salmon. In northern Russia and parts of Finland, many tribes, including the Lapp even today, specialized in herding a single species of reindeer.
Such specialization was probably far higher when more large prey (horse, auroch, giant elk, bison, giant sloth, mastodon, mammoth, zebra, elephant, hippopotamus, giraffe, musk oxen, etc.) roamed North America, Europe, and Africa in large herds during the Paleolithic. Large wild animals unafraid of humans no longer exist. During the Paleolithic they were either driven extinct or adapted to be afraid of humans and our projectiles. However, for most of the time span of H. sapiens sapiens these herds were abundant and easy pickings to specialist hunters. According to our theory of trade-based predation, specialization was quite likely far higher when large prey roamed North America, Europe, and Africa in large herds during the Paleolithic. Trade-based division of labor in hunting between tribes is consistent with (although not securely confirmed by) the archaeological evidence from the Paleolithic in Europe.
These migrating bands, following their herds, frequently interacted, creating many opportunities for trade. American Indians preserved food by drying, making pemmican, and so on in ways that lasted for a few months but typically not a full year. Such food was commonly traded, along with skins, weapons, and collectibles. Often these trades occurred during annual trading expeditions.[T01]
Large herd animals migrated through a territory only two times a year, with a window most often of one or two months. Without any other source of protein besides their own prey species, these specialist tribes would have starved. The very high degree of specialization demonstrated in the archaeological record could only have occurred if there was trade.
Thus, even if the time-offset barter of meat were the only kind of trade, this is quite sufficient to make the use of collectibles quite worthwhile. The necklaces, flints, and any other objects used as money circulate in a closed loop, back and forth, in roughly equal amounts so long as the value of meat traded remains roughly equal. Note that it is not enough, for the theory of collectibles put forth in this paper to be correct, that single beneficial trades were possible. We must identify closed loops of mutually beneficial trades. With closed loops the collectibles continue to circulate, amortizing their costs.
As mentioned, we know from archaeological remains that many tribes specialized in a single large prey species. This specialization was at least seasonal; if there was extensive trade it could have been full-time. Becoming experts in the habits and migration patterns, and best methods of taking down, a tribe reaped enormous productive benefits. These benefits, however, would normally be unattainable, for specializing in a single species meant going without food most of the year. Division of labor between tribes paid off – and trade made it possible. The supply of food would nearly double from trade just between two complementary tribes. There were, however, rather than two prey species, often up to a dozen that migrated through most hunting territories in areas like the Serengeti and the European steppe. The amount of meat available to a species-specializing tribe would thus likely more than double with such trade among a handful of neighboring tribes. On top of this, the extra meat would be there when needed most – when the meat from a tribe’s own species prey would already have been eaten, and without food the hunters would starve.
Thus there were at least four gains, or sources of surplus, from a trade cycle as simple as two prey species and two non-simultaneous but offsetting trades. These gains are distinct but not necessarily independent:
An available source of meat at a time of the year when one would otherwise starve.
An increase in the total supply of meat – they traded the surplus beyond what they could eat immediately or store; what they didn’t trade would have gone to waste.
An increase in the variety of nutrition from meat, by eating different kinds of meat.
Increased productivity from specialization in a single prey species.
Making or saving collectibles to trade for food itself was not the only way to insure against bad times. Perhaps even more common, especially where large prey items were not available, was territoriality combined with trade in foraging rights. This can be observed even in some of the remnants of hunter-gatherer culture that exist today.
The !Kung San of southern Africa, like all other modern remnants of hunter-gatherer cultures, live on marginal lands. They have no opportunity to be specialists but must take the meager remnants available. They may thus be rather uncharacteristic of many ancient hunter-gatherer cultures, and uncharacteristic of the original Homo sapien sapiens, which first seized the lushest lands and best game routes from Homo sapiens neanderthalensis and only much later drove the Neanderthals from marginal lands. Yet despite their severe ecological handicap, the !Kung use collectibles as items of trade.
Like most hunter-gatherers, the !Kung spend most of the year in small, dispersed bands and a few weeks of the year in an aggregate with several other bands. Aggregation is like a fair with added features – trade is accomplished, alliances are cemented, partnerships strengthened, and marriages transacted. Preparation for aggregation is filled with the manufacture of tradeable items, partly utilitarian but mostly of a collectible nature. The exchange system, called by the !Kung hxaro, involves a substantial trade in beaded jewelry, including ostrich-shell pendants quite similar to those found in Africa 40,000 years ago.
Pattern of hxaro exchanges and kinship relations among neighboring tribes of !Khung San hunter-gatherers.
Necklaces used in the hxaro exchange.
One of the main things the !Kung buy and sell with their collectibles are abstract rights to enter another band’s territory and hunt or gather food there. Trade in these rights is especially brisk during local shortages which can be alleviated by foraging in a neighbor’s territory.[W77][W82] !Kung bands mark their territories with arrows; trespassing without having purchased the right to enter and forage is tantamount to a declaration of war. Like the inter-band food trade discussed above, the use of collectibles to purchase foraging rights constitutes an “insurance policy against starvation”, to use the phrase of Stanley Ambrose.[A98]
Although anatomically modern humans surely had conscious thought, language, and some ability to plan, it would have required little conscious thought or language, and very little planning, to generate trades. It was not necessary that tribe members reasoned out the benefits of anything but a single trade. To create this institution it would have sufficed that people follow their instincts to make obtain collectibles with the characteristics outlined below (as indicated by proxy observations that make approximate estimations for these characteristics). This is to various extents true of the other institutions we will study – they evolved, rather than being consciously designed. No one participating in the institution’s rituals would have explained their function in terms of ultimate evolutionary function; rather they explained in terms of a wide variety of mythologies that served more as proximate motivators of behavior than as theories of ultimate purpose or origin.
Direct evidence for trade in food has long since decayed. We may, in the future, find more direct evidence than is now available for this article, via comparison of hunting remains in one tribe with the consumption patterns in another tribe – the hardest part of this task likely being to identify the boundaries of different tribes or kin groups. According to our theory, such transfer of meat from one tribe to another was common in many parts of the world during the Paleolithic where large-scale and specialized big game hunting occurred.
For now, we do have extensive indirect evidence of trade, via the movement of the collectibles themselves. Fortunately there is a good correlation between the durability desired for collectibles and the conditions under which an artifact has survived to be found by today’s archaeologists. In the early Paleolithic, when all human movement was on foot, we have instances of perforated sea shells found up to 500 kilometers away from the nearest source.[C94] There was a similar long-distance movement of flint.
Unfortunately, trade was severely restricted by high transaction costs in most times and places. The primary barrier was the antagonism between tribes. The predominant relationship between tribes was one of distrust on good days and outright violence on bad days. Only ties of marriage or kinship could bring tribes into a relationship with trust, albeit only occasionally and of limited scope. The poor ability to protect property, even collectibles worn on the person or buried in well-hidden caches, meant that collectibles had to amortize their costs in a few transactions.
Trade was thus not the only kind of wealth transfer, and probably not the most important kind during the long human prehistory where high transaction costs prevented the development of the kinds of markets, firms, and other economic institutions we now take for granted.[L94] Underneath our great economic institutions are far more ancient institutions that also involved wealth transfer – in prehistoric times, the main kinds of wealth transfer. All of these institutions distinguished Homo sapiens sapiens from previous animals. We now turn to one of the most basic kinds of wealth transfer that we humans take for granted but other animals do not have – passing wealth onto the next generation.
Kin Altruism Beyond the Grave
Coincidence in time and locale of supply and demand for trade was rare – so much so, that most kinds of trades and trade-based economic institutions we now take for granted could not exist. Even more unlikely was the triple coincidence of supply with demand with a major event for a kin group – the formation of a new family, death, crime, or victory or defeat in war. As we shall see, clans, and individuals greatly benefited from a timely transfer of wealth during these events. Such wealth transfer in turn was much less wasteful when it was the transfer of a store of wealth more durable and general than consumables or tools designed for other purposes. The demand for a durable and general store of wealth for use in these institutions was thus even more urgent than for trade itself. Furthermore, the institutions of marriage, inheritance, dispute resolution, and tribute may predate intertribal trade, and involved for most tribes a greater transfer of wealth than trade. These institutions thus more than trade served as the motivator and incubator of the earliest primitive money.
In most hunter-gatherer tribes this wealth came in a form that strikes us preposterously wealthy moderns as trivial – a collection of wooden utensils, flint and bone tools and weapons, shells on strings, perhaps a hut and in colder climates some mangy furs. Sometimes it could all be carried on the person. Nevertheless, these motley assortments were wealth for a hunter-gatherer no less than real estate, stocks, and bonds are wealth for us. To the hunter-gatherer tools and sometimes warm clothes were necessary for survival. Many of the items were highly valued collectibles that insured against starvation, purchased mates, and could substitute for massacre or starvation in event of war and defeat. The ability to transfer the capital of survival to one’s descendants was another advantage Homo sapiens sapiens had over previous animals. Furthermore, the skilled tribesman or clan could accumulate a surplus of wealth from the occasional, but cumulative over a lifetime, trade of surplus consumables for durable wealth, especially collectibles. A temporary fitness advantage could be translated into a more durable fitness advantage for one’s descendants.
Another form of wealth, hidden from the archaeologist, were titles to offices. Such social positions were more valuable than the tangible forms of wealth in many hunter-gatherer cultures. Examples of such positions included clan leaders, war party leaders, hunting party leaders, membership in a particular long-term trading partnership (with a particular person in a neighboring clan or tribe), midwives, and religious healers. Often collectibles not only embodied wealth, but also served as a mnemonic, representing the title to a clan position of responsibility and privilege. Upon death, to maintain order, the heirs to such positions had to be quickly and clearly determined. Delays could spawn vicious conflicts. Thus, a common event was the mortuary feast, in which the deceased was feted while both his tangible and intangible forms of wealth were distributed to descendants, as determined by custom, clan decision-makers, or the will of the deceased.
Other kinds of free gifts were quite rare in pre-modern cultures, as Marcel Mauss[M50] and other anthropologists have pointed out. Seemingly free gifts in fact implicitly invoked an obligation in the recipient. Before contract law, this implicit obligation of the “gift”, along with community dishonor and punishments ensuing if the implicit obligation was not met, was perhaps the most common motivator of reciprocation in delayed exchange, and is still common in the variety of informal favors we do for each other. Inheritance and other forms of kin altruism were the only widely practiced forms of what we moderns would call gift proper, namely a gift that imposed no obligation on the recipient.
Early Western traders and missionaries, who often saw natives as childish primitives, sometimes called their tribute payments “gifts” and trades “gift exchanges”, as if they bore more resemblance to the Christmas and birthday present exchanges of Western children than to the contractual and tax obligations of adults. Partly this may have reflected prejudice, and partly the fact that in the West by that time obligations were usually formalized in writing which the natives lacked. Westerners thus usually translated the rich variety of words natives had for their exchange institutions, rights, and obligations as “gift”. Seventeenth-century French settlers in America were thinly scattered among much larger populations of Indian tribes, and often found themselves paying tribute to these tribes. Calling these payments “gifts” was a way for them to save face with other Europeans who faced no such necessity and found it cowardly.
Mauss and modern anthropologists have unfortunately kept this terminology. The uncivilized human is still like a child, but now innocent like a child, a creature of moral superiority who would not stoop to our kind of base, cold-blooded economic transactions. However in the West, especially in the official terminology used for our laws covering transactions, a “gift” refers to a transfer that imposes no obligation. When coming across anthropological discussions of “gift exchange” these caveats should be kept in mind – modern anthropologists are not at all referring to the free or informal gifts we commonly refer to in our modern use on the term “gift”. They are rather referring to any of a wide variety of often quite sophisticated systems of rights and obligations involved in wealth transfers. The only major transactions in prehistoric cultures similar to our modern gift, in that it was neither itself a widely recognized obligation nor imposed any obligation on the recipient, were parents or maternal kin caring for their children and inheritance. (An exception was that inheriting title to a position imposed the responsibilities of the position on the heir as well as its privileges).
Inheritance of some heirlooms might proceed for several generations uninterrupted, but it did not by itself form a closed loop of collectibles transfers. Heirlooms were only valuable if they eventually got used for something else. They often were used in marriage transactions between clans that could form closed loop cycles of collectibles.
The Family Trade
An early and important example of a small closed loop trade network made possible by collectibles involves the much higher investment humans make in raising offspring than our primate relatives, and the related human institution of marriage. Combining arrangements of long-term matches for mating and child-raising, negotiated between clans, with wealth transfer, marriage is a human universal and probably dates back to the first Homo sapiens sapiens.
Parental investment is a long-term and almost one-shot affair – there is no time for repeated interactions. Divorce from a negligent father or unfaithful wife usually represented several years of time wasted, in genetic fitness terms, by the jilted party. Fidelity and commitment to the children were primarily enforced by in-laws – the clan. The marriage was the contract between clans that usually included such promises of fidelity and commitment as well as wealth transfer.
The contributions a man and a woman will bring to a marriage are seldom equal. This was even more true in an era when mate choice was largely determined by clans and the population from which clan leaders could choose was quite small. Most commonly, the woman was considered more valuable and the groom’s clan paid a bride price to the bride’s clan. Quite rare in comparison was dowry, a payment by the bride’s clan to the new couple. Mostly this was practiced by upper classes of monogamous but highly unequal societies in medieval Europe and India, and was ultimately motivated by the far greater reproductive potential of upper-class sons than upper-class daughters in those societies. Since literature was mostly written about upper classes, dowry often plays a role in European traditional stories. This does not reflect its actual frequency across human cultures – it was quite rare.
Marriages between clans could form a closed cycle of collectibles. Indeed, two clans exchanging partners would be sufficient to maintain a closed loop, as long as brides tended to alternate. If one clan was wealthier in collectibles from some other kind of transfer, it could marry more of its sons to better brides (in monogamous societies) or a greater number of brides (in polygamous societies). In a loop involving only marriages, primitive money would simply serve to replace the need for memory and trust between clans over a long period of delay between unbalanced transfers of reproductive resources.
Like inheritance, lawsuit, and tribute, marriage requires a triple coincidence of the event, in this case the marriage, with supply and demand. Without a transferable and durable store of value, the current ability of a groom’s clan to supply the current desires of the bride’s clan, to a large enough degree to make up the value mismatch between bride and groom, while also satisfying the political and romantic constraints of the match, were quite unlikely to be well satisfied. One solution is imposing an ongoing service obligation from the groom or his clan to the bride’s clan. This occurs in about 15% of known cultures.[DW88] In a much larger number, 67%, the groom or groom’s clan pays the bride’s clan a substantial amount of wealth. Some of this bride price is paid in immediate consumables, in plants to be gathered harvested and animals slaughtered for the marriage feast. In herding or agricultural societies much of the bride price is paid in livestock, a long-lasting form of wealth. The balance, and usually the most valuable portion of the bride-price in cultures without livestock, is paid with what are usually the most valuable family heirlooms – the rarest, costliest, and most durable pendants, rings, and so on. The Western practice of the groom giving the bride a ring – and a suitor giving a maiden other kinds of jewelry – was once a substantial transfer of wealth and was common in many other cultures. In about 23% of cultures, mostly modern ones, there is no substantial wealth exchange. In about 6% of cultures there is mutual exchange of substantial wealth between bride and groom clans. In only about 2% of cultures does the bride’s clan pay the new couple a dowry.[DW88]
Unfortunately, some wealth transfers were a far cry from the altruism of the inheritance gift or the joy of marriage. Quite the opposite, in the case of tribute.
The Spoils of War
Death rates from violence in chimp troops and hunter-gatherer human cultures alike are far higher than in modern civilizations. This probably dates at least as far back as our common ancestor with the chimpanzees – chimp troops, as well, are constantly fighting.
Warfare involved, among other things, killing, maiming, torture, kidnapping, rape, and the extortion of tribute in exchange for avoiding such fates. When two neighboring tribes were not at war, one was usually paying tribute to the other. Tribute could also serve to bind alliances, achieving economies of scale in warfare. Mostly, it was a form of exploitation more lucrative to the victor than further violence against the defeated.
Victory in war was sometimes followed by an immediate payment from the losers to the winners. Often this just took the form of looting by the enthusiastic victors, while the losers desperately hid their collectibles. More often, tribute was demanded on a regular basis. In this case, the triple coincidence could and sometimes was avoided by a sophisticated schedule of payments in kind that matched the losing tribe’s ability to supply a good or service with the victor’s demand for it. However, even with this solution primitive money could provide a better way – a common medium of value that greatly simplified the terms of payment – very important in an era when terms of the treaty could not be recorded but had to be memorized. In some cases, as with the wampum as used in the Iriquois Confederacy, the collectibles doubled as a primitive mnemonic device that, while not verbatim, could be used as an aid to recall the terms of the treaty. For the winners, collectibles provided a way to collect tribute at closer to the Laffer optimum. For the losers, collectibles buried in caches provided a way to “under-report”, leading the victors to believe the losers were less wealthy and thus demand less than they might. Caches of collectibles also provided insurance against overzealous tribute collectors. Much of the wealth in primitive societies escaped the notice of the missionaries and anthropologists due to its highly secretive nature. Only archeology can reveal the existence of this hidden wealth.
Hiding and other strategies presented a problem that tribute collectors share with modern tax collectors – how to estimate the amount of wealth they can extract. Value measurement is a thorny problem in many kinds of transactions, but never more so than in the antagonistic collection of tax or tribute. In making these very difficult and nonintuitive trade-offs, and then executing them in a series of queries, audits, and collection actions, tribute collectors efficiently optimized their revenue, even if the results seemed quite wasteful to the tribute payer.
Imagine a tribe collecting tribute from several neighbor tribes it previously defeated in war. It must estimate how much it can extract from each tribe. Bad estimates leave the wealth of some tribes understated, while forcing others to pay tribute based on estimates of wealth they don’t actually have. The result: the tribes that are hurt tend to shrink. The tribes that benefit pay less tribute than could be extracted. In both cases, less revenue is generated for the victors than they might be able to get with better rules. This is an application of the Laffer curve to the fortunes of specific tribes. On this curve, applied to income taxes by the brilliant economist Arthur Laffer, as the tax rate increases, the amount of revenue increases, but at an increasingly slower rate than the tax rate, due to increased avoidance, evasion, and most of all disincentive to engage in the taxed activity. At a certain rate due to these reasons tax revenues are optimized. Hiking the tax rate beyond the Laffer optimum results in lower rather than higher revenues for the government. Ironically, the Laffer curve was used by advocates for lower taxes, even though it is a theory of tax collection optimum to government revenue, not a theory of tax collection optimal to social welfare or individual preference satisfaction.
On a larger scale, the Laffer curve may be the most important economic law of political history. Charles Adams[A90] uses it to explain the rise and fall of empires. The most successful governments have been implicitly guided by their own incentives – both their short-term desire for revenue and their long-term success against other governments – to optimize their revenues according to the Laffer Curve. Governments that overburdened their taxpayers, such as the Soviet Union and later Roman Empire, ended up on the dust-heap of history, while governments that collected below the optimum were often conquered by their better-funded neighbors. Democratic governments may maintain high tax revenues over historical time by more peaceful means than conquering underfunded states. They are the first states in history with tax revenues so high relative to external threats that they have the luxury of spending most of the money in non-military areas. Their tax regimes have operated closer to the Laffer optimum than those of most previous kinds of governments. (Alternatively, this luxury may be made possible by the efficiency of nuclear weapons in deterring attack rather than the increased incentives of democracies to optimize to tax collection). When we apply the Laffer curve to examining the relative impact of treaty tribute terms on various tribes, we conclude that the desire to optimize revenues causes victors to want to accurately measure the income and wealth of the vanquished. Measuring value is crucial to determining the tributaries’ incentives to avoid or evade the tribute by hiding wealth, fight, or flight. For their part, tributaries can and do spoof these measurements in various ways, for example by burying collectibles in caches. Tribute collection involves a measurement game with unaligned incentives.
With collectibles, one can demand tribute at strategically optimal times instead of when items can be supplied by the tributary or is in demand by the victor. The victors can then choose when they will in the future consume the wealth, rather than having to consume it at the time the tribute is extracted. Much later, well into the dawn of history, in 700 BC, though trade was widespread, money still took the form of collectibles – made out of more precious metals, but in their basic characteristics, such as lack of uniform value, similar to most of the proto-money used since the dawn of Homo sapiens sapiens. This was changed by a Greek-speaking culture in Anatolia (modern Turkey), the Lydians. Specifically, the kings of Lydia were the first major issuers of coins in the archaeological and historical record.
From that day to this, government mints with self-granted monopolies, rather than private mints, have been the main issuers of coin. Why wasn’t minting dominated by private interests, such as private bankers, which did exist at the time in these semi-market economies? The main explanation for government dominance of coin minting has been that only governments could enforce anti-counterfeiting measures. However, they could have enforced such measures in protection of competing private mints, just as they enforce trademarks today and at that time as well.
It was far easier to estimate the value of a coin than that of a collectible – especially at low transaction values. Far more trades could be made with money instead of barter; indeed many kinds of low-value trades became possible for the first time as the small gains from trade for the first time exceeded transaction costs. Collectibles were low-velocity money, involved in a small number of high value transactions. Coins were high-velocity money, facilitating a large number of low value trades.
Given what we have seen about the benefits of proto-money to tribute and tax collectors, as well as the critical nature of the value measurement problem in optimally coercing such payments, it is not surprising that tax collectors, specifically the kings of Lydia, were the first major issuers of coinage. The king, deriving his revenue from tax collection, had a strong incentive to measure to value of wealth held and exchanged by his subjects more accurately. That the exchange also benefited from cheaper measurement by traders of the medium of exchange, creating something closer to efficient markets, and allowing individuals to enter into the marketplace on a larger scale for the first time, was for the king a fortuitous side effect. The greater wealth flowing through markets, now available to be taxed, boosted the king’s revenues even beyond the normal Laffer curve effect of reducing mismeasurement between given tax sources.
This combination of more efficient tax collection with more efficient markets meant a vast increase in overall tax revenues. These tax collectors almost literally hit a gold mine, and the wealth of Lydian kings Midas, Croesus, and Giges is famous to this day.
A few centuries later, the Greek king Alexander the Great conquered Egypt, Persia and much of India, funding his spectacular conquest by plundering Egyptian and Persian temples, filled with assemblages of low-velocity collectibles, and melting them down into high-velocity coins. More efficient and encompassing market economies as well as more efficient tax collection sprung up in his wake.
Tribute payments did not form by themselves a closed loop of collectibles. These were only valuable if they ultimately could be used by the victors for something else, such as marriage, trade, or collateral. However, victors could coerce the vanquished into manufacturing for obtaining collectibles, even if it did not serve the vanquished’s voluntary interests.
Disputes and Remedies
Ancient hunter-gatherers did not have our modern tort or criminal law, but they did have an analogous means of settling disputes, often judged by clan or tribal leaders or vote, that covered what modern law calls crimes and torts. Settling disputes through punishments or payments sanction by the clans of the disputing parties substituted for cycles of revenge or vendetta wars. Most pre-modern cultures, ranging from the Iriquois in America to the pre-Christian Germanic peoples, decided that payment was better than punishment. Prices (e.g. the Germanic “weregeld” and Iriquois blood money) were assigned to all actionable offenses, ranging from petty theft to rape to murder. Where money was available, the payment took the form of money. Livestock was used in herding cultures. Otherwise, payment of collectibles was the most commonly used remedy.
The payment of remedies for damages in a lawsuit or similar complaint led to the same kind of problem of triple coincidence of event, supply, and demand as occurred in inheritance, marriage, and tribute. The judgment of the case had to coincide with the ability of the plaintiff to pay the damages as well as the opportunity and desire of the defendant to benefit from them. If the remedy was a consumable the plaintiff already had plenty of, the remedy still served as a punishment but would not likely satisfy the defendant – and thus would not curb the cycle of violence. Thus, we here again the value added by collectibles – in this case, in making possible the remedy to resolve a dispute or terminate a cycle of revenge.
Dispute remedies would not form a closed loop if the payments served to entirely eliminate vendettas. However, if the payments did not completely dampen the vendetta, the payments could form a cycle following the cycle of revenge. For this reason, it is possible that the institution reached an equilibrium when it had reduced but not eliminated cycles of revenge until the advent of more densely connected trading networks.
Attributes of Collectibles
Since humans evolved in small, largely self-sufficient, and mutually antagonistic tribes, the use of collectibles to reduce the need for favor-tracking, and to make possible the other human institutions of wealth transfer we have explored, was far more important than the scale problems of barter for most of the timespan of our species. Indeed, collectibles provided a fundamental improvement to the workings of reciprocal altruism, allowing humans to cooperate in ways unavailable to other species. For them, reciprocal altruism is severely limited by unreliable memory. Some other species have large brains, build their own homes, or make and use tools. No other species has produced such an improvement to the workings of reciprocal altruism. The evidence indicates this new development had matured by 40,000 B.P.
Menger called this first money an “intermediate commodity” – what this paper calls collectibles. An artifact useful for other things, such as cutting, could also be used as a collectible. However, once institutions involving wealth transfer became valuable, collectibles would be manufactured just for their collectible properties. What are these properties? For a particular commodity to be chosen as a valuable collectible, it would have had, relative to products less valuable as collectibles, at least the following desirable qualities:
More secure from accidental loss and theft. For most of history this meant carriable on the person and easy to hide.
Harder to forge its value. An important subset of these are products that are unforgeably costly, and therefore considered valuable, for reasons explained below.
This value was more accurately approximated by simple observations or measurements. These observations would have had more reliable integrity yet have been less expensive.
Humans the world over are strongly motivated to collect items that better satisfy these properties. Some of this motivation probably includes genetically evolved instincts. Such objects are collected for the sheer pleasure of collecting them (not for any particularly good explicit and proximate reasons), and such pleasure is nearly universal across human cultures. One of the immediate proximate motivations is decoration. According to Dr. Mary C. Stiner, an archaeologist at the University of Arizona, “Ornamentation is universal among all modern human foragers.”[W02] For an evolutionary psychologist, such a behavior that has a good ultimate explanation, in terms of natural selection, but has no proximate rationale other than pleasure, is a prime candidate to be a genetically evolved pleasure that motivates the behavior. Such is, if the reasoning in this essay is correct, the human instinct to collect rare items, art, and especially jewelry.
Point (2) requires some further explanation. At first, the production of a commodity simply because it is costly seems quite wasteful. However, the unforgeably costly commodity repeatedly adds value by enabling beneficial wealth transfers. More of the cost is recouped every time a transaction is made possible or made less expensive. The cost, initially a complete waste, is amortized over many transactions. The monetary value of precious metals is based on this principle. It also applies to collectibles, which are more prized the rarer they are and the less forgeable this rarity is. It also applies where provably skilled or unique human labor is added to the product, as with art.
We have never discovered or made a product that does really well on all three scores. Art and collectibles (in the sense that word is used in modern culture, rather in the technical sense it is used in this paper) optimize (2), but not (1) or (3). Common beads satisfy (1) but not (2) or (3). Jewelry, made at first out of the most beautiful and less common shells but eventually in many cultures out of precious metals, comes closer to satisfying all three properties. It is no coincidence that precious metal jewelry usually came in thin forms such as chains and rings, allowing for inexpensive assaying at randomly chosen locations. Coins were a further improvement – substituting small standard weights and trademarks for assays greatly reduced the costs of small transactions using precious metals. Money proper was just a further step in the evolution of collectibles.
The kind of mobile art also made by Paleolithic man, (small figurines and the like) also matches these characteristics well. Indeed, Paleolithic man made very few objects that were not either utilitarian, or shared characteristics (1)-(3).
There are many puzzling instances of useless or at least unused flints with homo sapiens. We have mentioned the unusable flints of the Clovis people. Culiffe[C94] discusses a European Mesolithic era find of hundreds of flints, carefully crafted, but which micrograph analysis reveals were never used for cutting.
Flints were quite likely the first collectibles, preceding special-purpose collectibles like jewelry. Indeed, the first flint collectibles would have been made for their cutting utility. Their added value as a medium of wealth transfer was a fortuitous side effect that enabled the institutions described in this article to blossom. These institutions, in turn, would have motivated the manufacture of special-purpose collectibles, at first flints that need have no actual use as cutting tools, then the wide variety of other kinds of collectibles that were developed by Homo sapiens sapiens.
Shell money from Sumer, c. 3,000 B.C.
During the Neolithic era, in many parts of the Middle East and Europe, some kinds of jewelry became more standardized – to the point where standard sizes and assayability were often valued over beauty. In commercial areas the quantity of this jewelry sometimes greatly exceeded that of traditional jewelry in hoards. This is an intermediate step between jewelry and coins, when some collectibles increasingly took a fungible form. Around 700 B.C., the Lydian kings started issuing coins, as described above. The unforgeable costliness of standard weights of precious metals could now be “assayed” in a marketplace, by wage earners, or by tax collectors via trademark, i.e. trust in the mint’s brand, instead of chopping coiled wire at a randomly selected spot.
It is no coincidence that the attributes of collectibles are shared with precious metals, coins, and the reserve commodities that have backed most non-fiat currencies. Money proper implemented these properties a purer form than the collectibles used during almost all of human prehistory.
Silver ring and coil money from Sumer, c. 2,500 B.C. Note the standard size of cross-sections. Many of the pieces had a standard weight, ranging from one-twelfth of a shekel to sixty shekels. To assay a ring or coil, it could be weighed and cut at random locations. (Courtesy Oriental Institute, University of Chicago)
A novelty of the 20th century was the issue of fiat currencies by governments. (“Fiat” means not backed by any reserve commodity, as the gold- and silver-based currencies of previous centuries were). While generally excellent as media of exchange, fiat currencies have proven to be very poor stores of value. Inflation has destroyed many a “nest egg”. It is no coincidence that markets in rare objects and unique artwork – usually sharing the attributes of collectibles described above – have enjoyed a renaissance during the last century. One of our most advanced high-tech marketplaces, eBay, is centered around these objects of primordial economic qualities. The collectibles market is larger than ever, even if the fraction of our wealth invested in them is smaller than when they were crucial to evolutionary success. Collectibles both satisfy our instinctive urges and remain useful in their ancient role as a secure store of value.
Conclusion
Many kinds of wealth transfers – one-way and mutual, voluntary and coerced – face transaction costs. In voluntary trades both parties gain; a truly free gift is usually an act of kin altruism. These transactions create value for one or both parties as much as the physical act of making something. Tribute benefits the victor and a judgment of damages can prevent further violence as well as benefiting the victim. Inheritance made humans the first animals to pass wealth to their next-generation kin. These heirlooms could in turn be used as collateral or payment in trade for goods, for food to stave off starvation, or to pay a marriage bride price. Whether the costs of making these transfers – transaction costs – are low enough to make the transfers worthwhile is another matter. Collectibles were crucial in making these kinds of transactions possible for the first time.
Collectibles augmented our large brains and language as solutions to the Prisoner’s Dilemma that keeps almost all animals from cooperating via delayed reciprocation with nonkin. Reputational beliefs can suffer from two major kinds of errors – errors of about which person did what, and errors in appraising the value or damages caused by that act. Within clans (the small and immediately local kin group, or extended family, which formed a subset of a tribe), our large brains could minimize these errors, so that public reputation and coercive sanctions superseded the limited motivation provided by the counterparty’s ability to cooperate or defect in the future as the main enforcer of delayed reciprocation. In both Homo sapiens neanderthalensis and Homo sapiens sapiens, with the same large brain size, it is quite likely that every local clan member kept track of everybody other local clan member’s favors. The use of collectibles for trade within the small local kin group may have been minimal. Between clans within a tribe both favor tracking and collectibles were used. Between tribes, collectibles entirely replaced reputation as the enforcer of reciprocation, although violence still played a major role in enforcing rights as well as being a high transaction cost that prevented most kinds of trade.
When costliness becomes forgeable – Glass trade beads, manufactured in Venice in the 16th or 17th century, excavated from Mali, Africa. Such beads were very popular wherever European colonialists encountered Neolithic or hunter-gatherer cultures.
To be useful as a general-purpose store of wealth and means of wealth transfer, a collectible had to be embedded in at least one institution with a closed-loop cycle, so that the cost of discovering and/or manufacturing the object was amortized over multiple transactions. Furthermore, a collectible was not just any kind of beautiful decorative object. It had to have certain functional properties, such as the security of being wearable on the person, compactness for hiding or burial, and unforgeable costliness. That costliness must have been verifiable by the recipient of the transfer – using many of the same skills that collectors use to appraise collectibles today.
The theories presented in this paper can be tested by looking for these characteristics (or the lack of them) in the “valuables” often exchanged in these cultures, by examining the economic gains from the cycles through which these valuables move, and by observing preferences for objects with these characteristics in a wide variety of cultures (including modern ones).
With their unprecedented technology of cooperation, humans had become the most fearsome predator ever seen on the planet. They adapted to a shifting climate, while dozens of their large herd prey were driven, by hunting and climate change in America, Europe, and Asia, to extinction. Today, most large animals on the planet are afraid of projectiles – an adaption to only one species of predator [R97]. Cultures based more on gathering than hunting also greatly benefitted. A population explosion followed – Homo sapiens sapiens was able to populate more parts of the planet and at a density over ten times that of Homo sapiens neanderthalensis,[C94] despite weaker bones and no increase in brain size. Much of this increase may be attributed to the social institutions made possible by effective wealth transfer and language – trade, marriage, inheritance, tribute, collateral, and the ability to assess damages to dampen cycles of vengeance.
Primitive money was not modern money as we know it. It took on some of the functions modern money now performs, but its form was that of heirlooms, jewelry, and other collectibles. The use of these is so ancient that the desires to explore, collect, make, display, appraise, carefully store, and trade collectibles are human universals – to some extent instincts. This constellation of human desires might be called the collecting instinct. Searching for the raw materials, such as shells and teeth, and manufacturing of collectibles took up a considerable portion of many ancient humans’ time, just as many modern humans expend substantial resources on these activities as hobbies. The results for our ancient forebears were the first secure forms of embodied value very different from concrete utility – and the forerunner of today’s money.
References
[A90] Adams, Charles, For Good and Evil: The Impact of Taxes on Civilization ↩
[A98] Tim Appenzeller, &quot;Art: Evolution or Revolution?&quot;, Science 282(Nov 20, 1998), p. 1452. See also the home page of Stanley Ambrose ↩ ↩
[B04] The Blombos Cave Project ↩ ↩
[C94] Culiffe, Barry, ed., The Oxford Illustrated History of Prehistoric Europe, Oxford University Press 1994. ↩ ↩ ↩ ↩ ↩ ↩
[D89] Dawkins, Richard, The Selfish Gene, Oxford University Press 1989. ↩ ↩ ↩
[D94] Davies, Glyn, A History of Money, From Ancient Times to the Present Day, University of Wales Press 1994. ↩ ↩ ↩ ↩
[DW88] Daly, Martin and Wilson, Margo, Homicide, New York: Aldine (1998). ↩ ↩
[G95] Gilead, I. 1995. &quot;The Foragers of the Upper Paleolithic Period,&quot; in Archaeology and Society in the Holy Land. Ed. by T. E. Levy. New York, Facts on File. ↩
[G01] [ref: http://www-geology.ucdavis.edu/~GEL115/115CH1.html] ↩
[Gr01] Graeber, David, Towards an Anthropological Theory of Value, Palgrave 2001.
[I98] Ifrah, Georges, The Universal History of Numbers, John Wiley &amp; Sons 1998, pg. 73.
[K99] Kohn, M. and Mithen, S. &quot;Handaxes: Products of sexual selection?&quot;, Antiquity, 73, 518-526.
[K99] Kohn, M. and Mithen, S. &quot;Handaxes: Products of sexual selection?&quot;, Antiquity, 73, 518-526.
[L94] Landa, Janet, Trust, Ethnicity, and Identity: Beyond the New Institutional Economics of Ethnic Trading Networks, Contract Law, and Gift-Exchange, The University of Michigan Press, second edition, 1998. ↩ ↩ ↩
[M1892] Menger, Carl, &quot;On the Origins of Money&quot; Economic Journal, volume 2,(1892) p. 239-55. translated by C.A. Foley, at http://www.socsci.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3ll3/menger/money.txt ↩
[M50] Mauss, Marcel, The Gift, 1950, English translation by W.D. Halls, W.W. Norton 1990. ↩
[M93] (Morse 1993) via http://www.wac.uct.ac.za/wac4/symposia/papers/s095wht1.pdf ↩
[R96] Riddley, Matt, The Origins of Virtue, Viking 1996.
[T01] Taylor, Alan, American Colonies – The Settling of North America, Penguin 2001. ↩ ↩
[P89] Plattner, Stuart, Economic Anthropology, Stanford University Press 1989.
[W77] Wiessner, P. 1977. Hxaro: a regional system at reciprocity for reducing risk among the !Kung San. Unpublished PhD thesis: University of Michigan. ↩
[W82] Wiessner, P. 1982. Risk, reciprocity and social influences on !Kung San economies. In: Leacock, H. R. &amp; Lee, R.B. (eds) Politics and history in band societies: 61-84. London: Cambridge University Press.
[W95] White, Randall, &quot;Ivory Personal Ornaments of Aurignacian Age: Technological, Social and Symbolic Perspectives&quot;, Institute For Ice Age Studies, http://www.insticeagestudies.com/library/Ivory/Ivorypersonal.html ↩
[W97] White, Randall, &quot;From Materials To Meaning&quot;, Institute For Ice Age Studies, http://www.insticeagestudies.com/library/materialstomeaning/index.html ↩
[W98] Winterhalder, Bruce, &quot;Intra-Group Resource Transfers: Comparative Evidence, Models, and Implications for Human Evolution&quot;, http://www.unc.edu/depts/ecology/winterweb/intra_group.html ↩
[W02] Wilford, John, &quot;Debate is Fueled on When Humans Became Human&quot;, New York Times, February 26th, 2002  ↩
Acknowledgements
My thanks to Jerome Barkow, Andrew Odlyzko, Bruce Smith, K. Eric Drexler, Markus Krummenacker, Mark Wiley, Norm Hardy, and others for their insightful comments.
Please send your comments to nszabo (at) law (dot) gwu (dot) edu
Copyright © 2002, 2005 by Nick Szabo
Permission to redistribute without alteration hereby granted
Editor’s note: Some links may be broken.Read in Español and ItalianoAboutContactPodcastsFeedNewsletterDonateGet involvedGitHubXNostrSatoshi Nakamoto InstituteEstablished block#272,311Satoshi Nakamoto Institute is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. Some works may be subject to other licenses.
The Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterDonateToggle languageENOpen main menuThe Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterLibrary/Smart ContractsLibrarySmart ContractsNick Szabo1994External linkGlossary
A smart contract is a computerized transaction protocol that executes the terms of a contract. The general objectives of smart contract design are to satisfy common contractual conditions (such as payment terms, liens, confidentiality, and even enforcement), minimize exceptions both malicious and accidental, and minimize the need for trusted intermediaries. Related economic goals include lowering fraud loss, arbitration and enforcement costs, and other transaction costs.[1]
Some technologies that exist today can be considered as crude smart contracts, for example POS terminals and cards, EDI, and agoric allocation of public network bandwidth.
Digital cash protocols[2,3] are fine examples of smart contracts. They enable online payment while honoring the characteristics desired of paper cash: unforgeability, confidentiality, and divisibility. When we take a second glance at digital cash protocols, considering them in the wider context of smart contract design, we see that these protocols can be used to implement a wide variety of electronic bearer securities, not just cash. We also see that to implement a full customer-vendor transaction, we need more than just the digital cash protocol; we need a protocol that guarantees that product will be delivered if payment is made, and vice versa. Current commercial systems use a wide variety of techniques to accomplish this, such as certified mail, face to face exchange, reliance on credit history and collection agencies to extend credit, etc. Smart contracts have the potential to greatly reduce the fraud and enforcement costs of many commercial transactions. Digital cash protocols use several of the rich new building blocks coming out of the fields of cryptography and computer science. Most of these components have not yet been widely exploited to facilitate contractual arrangements, but the potential is vast. These subprotocols include Byzantine agreement, symmetric and asymmetric encryption, digital signatures, blind signatures, cut &amp; choose, bit commitment, multiparty secure computations, secret sharing, and oblivious transfer. All of these except the first are described in [2,3].
The consequences of smart contract design on contract law and economics, and on strategic contract drafting, (and vice versa), have been little explored. As well, I suspect the possibilities for greatly reducing the transaction costs of executing some kinds of contracts, and the opportunities for creating new kinds of businesses and social institutions based on smart contracts, are vast but little explored. The “cypherpunks”[4] have explored the political impact of some of the new protocol building blocks. The field of Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), in which elements of traditional business transactions (invoices, receipts, etc.) are exchanged electronically, sometimes including encryption and digital signature capabilities, can be viewed as a primitive forerunner to smart contracts. Indeed those business forms can provide good starting points and channel markers for smart contract designers.
One important task of smart contracts, that has been largely overlooked by traditional EDI, is communicating the semantics of the transaction to the parties involved. There is ample opportunity in smart contracts for “smart fine print”: actions taken by the software hidden from a party to the transaction. For example, grocery store POS machines don’t tell customers whether or not their names are being linked to their purchases in a database. The clerks don’t even know, and they’ve processed thousands of such transactions under their noses. Thus, via hidden action of the software, the customer is giving away information they might consider valuable or confidential, but the contract has been drafted, and transaction has been designed, in such a way as to hide those important parts of that transaction from the customer.
To communicate transaction semantics well, we need good visual metaphors for the elements of the contract. These would hide the details of the protocol without surrendering control over the knowledge and execution of contract terms. A primitive but good example is provided by the SecureMosiac software from CommerceNet. Encryption is shown by putting the document in an envelope, and a digital signature by affixing a seal onto the document or envelope. On the other hand, Mosaic servers log connections, and sometimes even transactions, without warning users—classic hidden actions.
Another area that might be considered in smart contract terms is synthetic assets.[5] These new securities are formed by combining securities (such as bonds) and derivatives (options and futures) in a wide variety of ways. Very complex term structures for payments (i.e., what payments get made when, the rate of interest, etc.) can now be built into standardized contracts and traded with low transaction costs, due to computerized analysis of these complex term structures. Synthetic assets allow us to arbitrage the different term structures desired by different customers, and they allow us to construct contracts that mimic other contracts, minus certain liabilities. As an example of the latter, synthetic assets have been constructed that mimic the returns of stocks in German companies, without requiring payment of the tax foreigners must pay to the German government for capital gains in German stocks. It’s important to note that these synthetics do not confer voting rights as do the originals. It might be possible to add smart contract protocols to transfer voting rights to the synthetic. Of course, these protocols might have to be quite secure to withstand attacks from the third party jurisdiction, whose transaction cost (the tax) is being arbitraged away by the synthetic asset.
Finally, we can extend the concept of smart contracts to property. Smart property might be created by embedding smart contracts in physical objects. These embedded protocols would automatically give control of the keys for operating the property to the agent who rightfully owns that property, based on the terms of the contract. For example, a car might be rendered inoperable unless the proper challenge-response protocol is completed with its rightful owner, preventing theft. If a loan was taken out to buy that car, and the owner failed to make payments, the smart contract could automatically invoke a lien, which returns control of the car keys to the bank. This smart lien might be much cheaper and more effective than a repo man. Also needed is a protocol to provably remove the lien when the loan has been paid off, as well as hardship and operational exceptions. For example, it would be rude to revoke operation of the car while it’s doing 75 down the freeway.
Smart property may be a ways off, but digital cash and synthetic assets are here today, and more smart contract mechanisms are being designed. So far the design criteria important for automating contract execution have come from disparate fields like economics and cryptography, with little cross-communication: little awareness of the technology on the one hand, and little awareness of its best business uses other. The idea of smart contracts is to recognize that these efforts are striving after common objectives, which converge on the concept of smart contracts.
References
[1] The New Palgrave: Allocation, Information, and Markets ↩
[2] Bruce Schneier, Applied Cryptography (digital cash objectives are on pg. 123) ↩ ↩
[3] Crypto and Eurocrypt conference proceedings, 1982-1994. ↩ ↩
[4] &quot;Crypto Rebels&quot;, Wired #2, also cypherpunks mailing list (mail to [email&#160;protected] with body &quot;subscribe cypherpunks&quot;) ↩
[5] Perry H. Beaumont, Fixed Income Synthetic Assets ↩
AboutContactPodcastsFeedNewsletterDonateGet involvedGitHubXNostrSatoshi Nakamoto InstituteEstablished block#272,311Satoshi Nakamoto Institute is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. Some works may be subject to other licenses.
Unenumerated Unenumerated An unending variety of topics Friday, March 23, 2018 The many traditions of non-governmental money (part i) The central bank of the United States, the Federal Reserve, has put out &#8220;educational material&#8221; on Bitcoin for teachers and students (including a quiz!). The Bitcoin parts are odd enough, but this and a subsequent blog post will focus on the following statement: &#8220;traditionally, currency is produced by a nation's government.&#8220; Is that a fair representation of monetary traditions? At the very least it is quite incomplete. This two-part series will proceed back in time, showing some of the many examples non-governmental money, in order to fill in some of the gaps. Privately issued IOUs and privately minted coins are covered here in part (i) of the series. These IOUs can more specifically be described as bearer promissory notes, and even more specifically, when issued by banks, bank notes . The Bitcoin public blockchain implements a global settlement layer ("layer 1" in bitcoin parlance). The closest historical analog to the Bitcoin settlement layer is not to the bank notes, nor even to the coins (despite its name), it is to the monetary metal that for most of monetary history from ancient civilization to the 20th century ultimately underlay the IOUs. This "metal layer" of historical money systems will be covered in part (ii) of this series, as will some even more ancient forms of non-governmental money. Bank notes Higher layers of the bitcoin ecosystem, which can include exchanges (centralized or decentralized) as well as more trust-minimized systems such as Lightning , correspond most closely in our rough historical analogies to checking accounts (which, although often counted by economists as part of the money supply, and not created or managed by governments, will be so familiar to most readers that they will not be covered in this series) and to private bank notes. In these higher layer monetary systems, a more computationally (or for bank notes physically) efficient medium is substituted for a less efficient medium (for bank notes, often the underlying metal), usually (as is the case with checking accounts, bank notes, and centralized bitcoin exchanges alike) at the cost of increasing trust and thus vulnerability and risk in the system. Bank note (bearer promissory instrument) issued by the North of Scotland Bank, 1945. Many banks besides central banks have issued bank notes that circulated as currency. George Selgin and Lawrence White among others have done extensive work in this area . Knowledge of the long history of non-governmental money was one of the inspirations of the original invention of trust-minimized cryptocurrency. This practice continues to this day in Hong Kong and Scotland. Stockholms Enskilda Bank note, Sweden, 1876. Critics have said that decentralized note issue, following the same principles of fractional reserve and maturity mismatch as central banks, were just as or more prone to runs on the bank. Defenders have argued that competition between note-issuing banks formed a peer-to-peer system where banks could redeem competitors' notes, making it more reliable and robust form of fractional reserve banking than a central bank run or managed fractional reserve. Hong Kong & Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC) bank note, 2009. Ipswich Bank, a "country" (non-London) bank in England, 1820s (this instance unissued). Traditionally country banks, like the Bank of England, redeemed for specie, i.e. the official coin, which contained a standard weight of monetary metal (usually in this era silver). After 1833, Bank of England notes became legal tender which holders of country bank notes had to accept in lieu of specie. Bank of Prince Edward Island note, Canada, 1871 Mechanic&#8217;s Bank note of 1856, Augusta, Georgia. Before our Civil War, most paper money in the United States was privately issued. Boone County Bank note, Lebanon, Indiana 1858. " During this era the U.S. had no central bank and paper money was issued by a variety of private banks. Some was even issued by manufacturing and retail companies. This money was backed by gold, silver, real estate, stocks, bonds, and a wide variety of other assets. You can no longer cash them in, but they are now worth often substantial sums as collectibles...the note designs were more varied and creative than modern money, and were remarkably free of politicians' faces." Source Bank of De Soto note, De Soto, Nebraska, 1863. Critics have called this era of U.S. private bank note issue the "wildcat banking" era. Collectors sometimes call surviving private bank notes "broken bank notes", because notes from banks that were quickly or never redeemed are much more likely to have survived in reasonable to excellent condition. Hagerstown Bank note, Hagerstown, Missouri, 1850s (this instance unissued). Some other scholars within the Federal Reserve remembered the private note-issuing era in the United States; their central bankers' view of it can be found here . Jiaozi, a bearer promissory note from the Song Dynasty. The earliest jiaozi were issued in Sichuan province by merchants to relieve their fellow merchants of the high costs of transporting the heavy government-issued iron coins. Gordon Tullock wrote of bearer promissory notes in an earlier time and different part of China, By A.D. 700-800 there were shops in China which would accept valuables, and, for a fee, keep them safe. They would honour drafts drawn on the items in deposit, and, as with the goldsmith's shops in Europe, their deposit receipts gradually began to circulate as money. It is not known how rapidly this process developed, but by A.D. 1000 there were apparently a number of firms in China which issued regular printed notes and which had discovered that they could circulate more notes than the amount of valuables they had on deposit. [ Source ] Coins A brass half-penny issued by grocer Edward Nightingale, probably dating from the early 1670s. [ Source ] While in most times and places, coinage was a royal or otherwise political monopoly, there were a number of important exceptions where coins were minted privately and successfully circulated as currency. Per monetary historian Glyn Davies, during the English Commonwealth, Protectorate, and early Restoration occurred &#8220;a vast issue by merchants, manufacturers, and municipalities, between 1644 and 1672, of copper tokens, mostly of farthings and halfpence.&#8221; [ Davies p243] Anglesey & Mines druid half-penny, England, 1788. "From 1787 to 1797, private merchants and industrialists issued 600 tons of custom-made 'commercial' copper coin, which was more copper coin than the Royal Mint had supplied during the previous half century." [ Source ]. Ironbridge coin, minted by Coalbrookdale Works, Shropshire, England, 1782. In the industrial revolution, factories had to attract workers with frequent pay that could be spent at bargain shops. The Royal Mint was not producing low-denomination coins, so factories minted their own or used the coins minted by another firm. A good review by Jeffrey Hummel of George Selgin's excellent analysis of this era here. Privately minted coins from Sichuan province, China, 1912. While the minting of private coins, especially imitations of official coins, was often banned in order to secure a royal or other political monopoly, the industrial revolution was not the only time or place where private entities minted. Private coinage was by no means even limited to the Anglosphere. Nevertheless, the vast majority of coins in the numismatic record were minted by or under the license of kings, emperors, elected officials, and other kinds of political leaders, and these are also the kinds of coins prized by political historians as the most durable records of a leaders' reign. In part (ii) of this series we will explain and give a few examples of the monetary metals themselves, usually mined and processed by private entities. For most of monetary history, from ancient civilization until recent times, the monetary metals were the ultimate "O" in the IOUs -- the substances that bearer promissory notes were most often redeemed for -- and constituted the most common contents of the coins themselves. The various forms into which monetary metals could be shaped, including coins, were sampled and assayed for their metal content when used outside of the locale where they were issued or covered by legal tender laws. Part (ii) will also explain why these metals, not any of their particular forms, are the closest analog we have to Bitcoin in monetary history. Finally, we will cover some the many other forms besides coins that these metals could take, the monetary and quasi-monetary functions of these forms, and get some glimpses of even more ancient forms that were the common ancestors of modern money and modern jewelry. Part 2 can only scratch the surface of this vast topic and will refer the reader to more in-depth works including those of this author. Posted by Nick Szabo at 10:54 AM 13 comments: Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest Wednesday, March 29, 2017 Collecting metal: the inner and outer worlds of jewelry, coins, bullion bits, and odd shiny things Millions of millennia ago, in our own Milky Way galaxy, but far upstream of where we are today, two neutron stars spiraled around each other, each embodying the mass of a sun but smaller and faster than a speeding planet. Each of these tiny gigaworlds, millions of times denser than our sun, had been produced, not by a mere exploding star, but by a far more powerful supernova. Each supernova, burning a nuclear fire with a far greater power density than a normal star such as our sun, had besides a neutron star also produced a cavalcade of new elements. For elements lighter than iron, this nuclear fusion releases energy; but for elements heavier than iron, including copper, silver, and gold, nuclear fusion requires a net energy input as well as astronomical power densities. Our supernovae were powerful enough to create many metals, including copper and silver, from the fusion of lighter elements. But they were not powerful enough to create gold. Gold awaited the current, far more powerful and rarer event. Our two stars, fortuitously set into collision course by two separate supernovae, approached each other and then, captured by each others&#8217; gravity, entered a death spiral. They collided in an unimaginable explosion, unleashing a power density far greater than that of a mere supernova and trillions of times greater than if a mere mountain-sized asteroid had hit the earth. The collision was so intense that it created a black hole and a burst of extremely high energy light called gamma rays. Escaping the black hole along with the gamma rays was a spray of new, heavier metals, including gold. This gold-rich cloud in part expanded and in part coalesced, participating in the subsequent formation of new solar systems, including our own. Due to this collision of rare intensity, our unusual solar system was seeded with astronomically rare heavy metals such as gold along with the more common supernova products such as copper and silver. [ Source ] Copper (Cu), Silver (Ag), and Gold (Au) sit on top of each other on the periodic table, sharing many electrical, chemical, and material properties that enhance their durability and divisibility. Gold, the heaviest, required the most extreme conditions and energy to form, as all elements were generated, from lighter elements. Copper required easier conditions to form and is thus much more common, with silver in between. Billions of years later, naked apes evolved with hypertrophied brains and clever hands, living on a planet in this gold-dusted solar system. They dug out the gold and silver they could find and separated it from the more common earth. Other more common metals were more useful for concretely usable tools; instead they fashioned the precious metals into what looks to our eyes like jewelry. They formed these precious metals into shapes both repetitive and unique, bragged about them, displayed them, stored them as &#8220;treasure&#8221;, &#8220;wealth&#8221;, and &#8220;money&#8221;. They fashioned gold and silver into wearable objects, transferred them to each other or stole them, even injuring or killing each other in pursuit of them. They used the gold and silver to pay each other compensation for those and many other injuries. People transferred gold and silver to each other in order to satisfy important obligations as well as to obtain items of more direct and obvious use. Since the most important such obligations happened at many of the most fitness-critical junctures of life &#8211; marriage, death, injury, war &#8211; gold and silver, as treasure and as money, came to be greatly desired. Some metal collectibles came in a wide variety of artistically skilled forms. Others came in the form of coins: labeled, mass-produced pieces of metal stamped by the blow of a hammer or cast in molds, whereby a mostly-trusted brand named their alleged value. Still others came in forms that look odd to us, resembling neither coins nor fancy jewelry, but rather utilitarian-looking pieces that manage to make precious metals ugly, and that might have been worn but that look, long before the era of factories, like they were mass produced. . People around the world wore gold jewelry proudly, and globe-straddling monetary systems, on which economies were said to be based, were defined around gold and silver objects and debts denominated in weights of those metals. We can think of collectibles as coming at us at two levels, like railroads and trains, or like pipelines and the oil they carry. At the most basic or &#8220;inner layer&#8221; is the metal itself that constitutes the substance of the collectible: occasionally iron, more typically copper or bronze for the less valuable collectibles, and the precious metals, especially gold and silver, for the more valuable money and treasure. The &#8220;protocol stack&#8221;, or distinct layers of cultural understanding, for objects made out of precious metals: the natural, rare, and durable substance itself, versus the particular forms given to it as artwork, jewelry, coins, etc. So important is the &#8220;lower layer&#8221; of the traditional cultural understanding of gold and silver, the natural substance itself, evaluated by its weight rather than by any value added via the craftsmanship or its form, that Europeans of earlier generations evolved a word for it: bullion. Bullion is the metal itself, considered and valued only for its substance. Jewelry, coins, and other ways of shaping precious metals are just various forms of the underlying bullion. The famous gold/silver ratio (exchange rate) operates at this basic level. The cost and supply of precious metals, given the technological similarity of the means for mining and processing each, are dominated by their natural origins in the stars above and the geology below. Viking hoard unearted in Watlington, Scotland: silver coins, small ingots, and jewelry. Why were were coins (&#8220;money&#8221;) so often stashed with jewelry (&#8220;ornament&#8221;)? And what is up with those lumps? [ Source ] Besides their different origins in neutron star collisions and supernovae respectively, once our solar system had formed, the way our earth and its moon were formed may have also been important: when another planet collided with an earlier form of the earth, and the resulting debris clouds reformed into the earth and moon as we know it, heavier metals tended to stick with the heavier body while the lighter ones (which don&#8217;t include precious metals) tended to stick with the moon. Another theory holds that this collision did not matter: practically all the mineable concentrations of gold sunk to the center anyway; the gold we mine today came from a spate of later asteroid bombardment, said asteroids also being formed in the gold-rich dust of our early solar system. More local geology also played a role in where we have found gold and silver: equatorial Africa was formed with more gold than Europe, and Europe and Bolivia with more silver than China. As a result, the value (in terms of other kinds of goods) of gold and silver could vary significantly across the planet, as well as the exchange rate between the two precious metals. Only with modern transportation and ubiquitous markets has the gold:silver price ratio, as well as the exchange rates between precious metals and other goods, converged on ratios that hold the world over. Spheres of transfer and local distinctions In 1959 Paul Bohannan [1] coined the phrase &#8220;spheres of exchange&#8221; to refer to moral or legal distinctions made between different types of exchange. Often one set of collectibles was expected to be used in one kind of exchange, and another distinct set in another. Since there are several important kinds of wealth transfer besides exchange, we can generalize Bohannan&#8217;s idea to the concept of spheres of transfer. In Western cultures (and many other modern cultures under their influence), for example, we make a strong distinction between money, meant for the rapid turnover of earning and spending, and heirlooms that are expected to stay in the family for generations, with feelings of guilt or shame occurring if we have to sell a family heirloom. But it&#8217;s fine to use an heirloom ring for a marriage. Similarly, we make a strong distinction between stocks and bonds on the one hand and decorative wealth objects such as jewelry and artwork on the other. So strong is our taboo that if a Western archaeologist finds a wearable (as in forager days they mostly were) collectible, it is automatically and dogmatically labeled &#8220;ornamental&#8221; or &#8220;symbolic&#8221;, with wealth-related uses seldom considered. (It also doesn&#8217;t help that shells, often scarce and precious treasures in indigenous environments, look like cheap tourist knick-knacks to modern eyes). The transition from shell to metal: beads fashioned from copper (dark) and from Spondylus (spiny oyster) shells (light). The shells, transported by foot (probably by many feet and many hands) hundreds of miles from the Aegean Sea, had for thousands of years been popular in the Danube river basin when the world&#8217;s earliest metal artifacts were invented there. The first copper and gold artifacts were beads fashioned to substitute for the Spondylus beads in Danubian jewelry. [ Source] Legal or moral sanctions discourage transfer of objects from one sphere to another. In feudal European societies it was shameful and often even illegal to sell or mortgage land: a lord&#8217;s duty was to preserve his land and devise it intact to his eldest son. In modern Western society, weddings are one sphere of transfer (where a gift of a finger-ring is expected, as well as some household items from the guests and a feast or party thrown by the parents), whereas commerce and legal remedy in civil law is another (where payment of money is expected). Some aspects of our bodies (such as ownership of humans or payment for sex or body organs) are off limits to monetary compensation &#8211; one is expected to donate an organ, not to sell it &#8211; while many others are not (most health care, for example). All of these spheres can involve transfers of objects of substantial value, but it is disgraceful and/or illegal if they are the too obviously the wrong ones for the given sphere. The world&#8217;s oldest gold artifact &#8211; a small bead from the lower Danube river basin (4,600-4,500 BC). [ Source ] In the modern West, we consider the realm of jewelry and the realm of money to be very separate spheres of transfer. It is considered either a shameful betrayal or a grim necessity if the winner of an Olympic or Nobel Prize medal or a Super Bowl ring sells it to raise money. The finger-ring is a central feature of modern weddings, but few things would offend a typical modern bride more than being paid a bride price, she or her kin being indemnified by money as if she, as we would see it, were a prostitute on long-term contract. Meanwhile, our economists obsess over money while touching on the subject of jewelry hardly at all, and certainly not as any sort of form or variant of money. We moderns can hardly imagine confusing such seemingly very different things, and indeed the very idea offends our sensibilities. But in many non-Western and earlier Western cultures this was far from the case. For them the fundamental protocol layer, the substance itself, is cherished for its own sake, and forms the great majority of the value of the item, while its protocol layer two, the &#8220;outer layer&#8221;, the particular form it has been fashioned into, while often of considerable interest, is usually quite secondary in determining its value for purposes of the display and transfer of wealth. Recycling of gold jewelry in the United States: usually to be recast as bullion bars for central bank and gold exchange-traded-fund (ETF) reserves, or for export to Asia for making jewelry for which the gold content is far more important than in the West. Occasionally cast into gold coins for &#8220;gold bugs&#8221; and collectors. This modern Western restriction involves the more culturally local aspect of gold and silver, namely the particular form it takes (jewelry vs. coin), even though these objects are made out of the same underlying substance, and traditionally were mainly prized for the content by weight of that substance. Even in our own culture we have businesses that serve to transfer gold and silver from one sphere to another. Nevertheless, economists and other academicians often act as if money and jewelry are scientifically and objectively very distinct objects, when in fact this is a cultural convention that is largely confined to the modern West. Globe-trotting gold dealer Roy Sebag has [ described ] the differences between Asian and Western views of jewelry. As he describes it, over $2 trillion worth of jewelry is owned by about 2 billion people in India and China alone, constituting a much larger fraction of their wealth on average than in the West. The metal content of the gold jewelry constitutes the vast majority of its sales price and its assessed value as collateral, as it also does in Brazil, Russia, and most other countries outside of Western Europe, the British Commonwealth, and the United States. In the latter countries, precious metal content constitutes only a small fraction of the sales price or pawning value of jewelry. &#8220;Jewelry is money&#8221; is how Sebag summarizes his observations of the modern Asian jewelry market. In cultures without a strong distinction between decorative jewelry and money, they often didn&#8217;t even bother melting it down to switch from coins to lower velocity but more displayable forms of wealth. Roman gold coin minted c. 400 AD, converted in the 7th century into an Anglo- Saxon pendant: [ Source] [ See also ] While the &#8220;lower" or "inner" layer of the metal collectible &#8220;protocol stack&#8221; is its natural substance, its &#8220;upper" or "outer" layer is the particular form it takes. Sometimes it is mass produced (as in coins and common bead shapes) and sometimes it is a unique work of exquisite and rare craftsmanship. Form and style is the &#8220;protocol layer&#8221; of gold artifact most highly valued and distinguished in modern Western jewelry; but it is far less valued, compared to the natural substance itself, in the vast majority of Asian and pre-modern Western jewe lry. As with [ pre-metal forms of collectibles ], the form of metal collectibles can be sub-divided, in a way generalizable across nearly all known cultures, into treasure (typically of high value and not as an object fungible or divisible, unless melted down destroying the particular object) and money (objects such as coins that are meant to be efficiently transferred and combined with other such objects to create the particular amount of value needed). Metal or metaled treasure has taken the form of gilded objects, sculptures, various utilitarian objects enhanced artistically and made out of the scarcer metals, as well as jewelry. Treasure was, and sometimes still is, typically used for heirlooms, displays of wealth, as collateral for loans of money, and for large wealth transfers. In traditional societies these wealth transfers usually accompanied fitness-critical events. They often occurred at marriages, deaths, to satisfy obligations entered into to end wars, and as compensation for major injuries, as well as in helping to facilitate trade. The Stollhoff hoard &#8211; copper spirals and axe blades as well as gold discs from the upper Danube river watershed (modern Austria), c. 4000 BC. Spiral armbands were among the earliest large items worked from native copper, in the middle Danubian basin (modern Hungary) c. 5000-4500 BC. Money as this work defines it, on the other hand, can be distinguished from treasure by its fungibility and divisibility. In our Western tradition metal money and coins are practically synonymous, but with cross-cultural observations, as for example in [2] and [3], and even in modern Asia as Sebag has observed, the distinction between money and jewelry is far less clear-cut &#8211; with the proviso that in his mind, as well as in the minds of the jewelry customers and suppliers he observed, it is the divisibility and fungibility of the substance itself, not its form, that is paramount. Nevertheless, a significant fraction of the forms jewelry comes in, such as beads and constant-width wires, could be treated by their users if they so desired as fungible and divisible without destruction of even the form of the object. Indeed, such forms in jewelry, especially in the archaeological record, are more common than would seem likely if solely artistic and never monetary considerations had been involved in their original design. As a result of bringing their cultural assumptions to bear, endless energy has been wasted by Western observers trying to distinguish non-Western &#8220;money&#8221; or &#8220;primitive money&#8221; from non-Western &#8220;jewelry&#8221;. Boringly standard, divisible, and fungible, in its particular form as well as in the underlying metal, but boasting neither the kings and dates on coins desired by historians nor the fine craftsmanship of unique work beloved of museums, and categorizable by the dominant academic ideologies as neither money nor art nor ornament, so it sits packed in boxes in the cellar of the Danish National Museum, like many other such mundane but important artifacts underneath museums around the world. About 2,000 small gold spirals were buried in a fur-lined wooden box in Denmark between 900-700 B.C. [ Source ] Law and &#8220;money&#8221; Western (roughly speaking, European-derived) law, which now dominates the world, can be very flexible when it comes to applying itself to money. When supporting money with legal institutions, it tends to take a definition far more narrow the &#8220;medium of exchange and store of value&#8221; definition beloved of economists. When discouraging undesired forms, amounts, or velocities of money, on the other hand, law sometimes takes in a far broader scope of objects than Western economists think of as money. One of the more common modern legal definitions of &#8220;money&#8221;, used for laws that facilitate and support financial interchange (such as contracts for goods, checks, collateral for loans, etc.), is that money can only be an official government currency (see for example ). By definition, no substance or form of matter or pattern of information of any kind, regardless of how it functions or how it is used, can be money, if has not been authorized or adopted by a government. You cannot write a legal check in any of the United States for ounces of gold or Bitcoin, because gold and Bitcoin are not, per the Uniform Commercial Code, &#8220;money&#8221;. Such definitions, while quite necessary to understand if you hope to deal with money in the majority of modern countries with such laws, are hopelessly specific to a certain kind of culture and politics, as well as being scientifically unsound as a basis for reasoning about even just the role of money in exchange even in cultures living under such laws, much less its actual much wider role in wealth transfers and in other cultures without such laws. Thus outside of this section we will neglect such official definitions of money in this work. Instead we use the objective definition presented here. This is certainly not the only possible definition of &#8220;money&#8221;; many far wider, far narrower, and very conflicting definitions of this word have been used in the ethnographic, anthropologic, archaeological, and economic literatures, usually implicitly rather than consciously, thereby causing the reader to join the author in being hopelessly confused about the subject. Thus when enforcing rules for modern financial institutions, modern law uses a very narrow definition of money; the many other ways of storing and transferring wealth are not allowed to benefit from these advanced institutions. But when cracking down on alleged abuses of money, law often restricts a far wider array of objects used to store and transfer wealth. A great illustration of the monetary nature of jewelry is given by the current (as of this writing) Indian demonetization law. The crackdown includes gold and focuses on its natural substance, not its mere form as coin (&#8220;money&#8221; to modern Western eyes) as opposed to jewelry (supposedly &#8220;ornament&#8221; not &#8220;money&#8221;). Under Indian law it is all subject to stringent controls alongside the notes and coins: &#8230;the rules governing when tax officials could seize gold: Nothing would happen &#8220;if the holding is limited to 500 grams per married woman, 250 grams per unmarried woman and 100 grams per male.&#8221; It also said that there would be no limits on jewelry &#8220;provided it is acquired&#8230; from inheritance.&#8221; [ Source ] When Mongol conqueror Kublai Khan issued paper currency in late medieval China, to make this poorly trusted scheme work his government confiscated gold and silver, jewelry and coin alike, gems and pearls as well as gold and silver, in a forced exchange for the paper notes. [7] Bullion bits and odd shiny things Divisible and fungible metal forms such as coins, small thin ingots (hack-silver), arm-rings and wire , and beads have to a greater or lesser extent, depending on the culture, been used for small or frequent payments made to people who commonly need to make small acquisitions (such as the wages of soldiers and laborers), as well as to round out a value of a large wealth transfer to a specific desired value, that otherwise mostly constitutes treasure, indivisible and of a unique value somewhat different than the value desired, via custom, law, or negotiations, for the wealth transfer. W.B. Dickinson observed the ubiquity, both as archaeological artifacts in many far-flung parts of Eurasia and in widespread use in East Asia and Indian Ocean regions, of precious metals (bullion) in wire, coil, and arm-ring, in bullion forms that looked more utilitarian than decorative, and noted the wear on such artifacts indicating that at least some had probably passed from hand to hand with a velocity more coin-like than treasure-like. He observed that their existence extended throughout countries extending from Syria, Arabia, Egypt, Socotra, the Persian Gulf to Ceylon, China, Japan, Siam, and the whole East, to the south-west coast of Africa, to the north of Europe, to England and to Ireland. That the people of so many places, and in so various ages, should have formed their bullion and other metals into this particular form solely for the purpose of barter, without attaching to it any monetary character, seems a conclusion very difficult to arrive at&#8230;these forms were to all intents and purposes the money of the respective lands.[4] Larger ingots, and modern central bank gold bars, and ingots of intermediate value, such as the medieval Chinese silver sycee, also called 元寶: &#8220;primary treasure&#8221; . Originally &#8220;sycee&#8221; was Cantonese for &#8220;fine silk&#8221;, when that costly cloth was a main form of treasure; later it was superseded as treasure by the boat-shaped silver ingots, which inherited the word &#8220;sycee&#8221;, since it by then had become the generic term in Cantonese for &#8220;treasure&#8221;. Even though large ingots come in a standard form, divisible and fungible at large granularities of value, they can by our organizational scheme more properly be categorized as treasure than as money, since they were typically used like treasure in larger wealth transfers and as collateral for loans or (during the recent historical gold standard era) issues of debt-money. Silver stamped sycee ingot. [ Source ] Our distinction between treasure and money, it should be apparent, is not clear-cut and is not of crucial economic or political importance. More important and much more scientifically observable is the distinction between collectibles like coins, beads, and works of laborious or uncommon craftsmanship on the one hand, and non-collectibles of concrete utility or trivial decoration on the other. I have described this distinction with many examples and much explanation in Artifacts of Wealth and Shelling Out: The Origins of Money . The collectible continuum &#8211; more like money as we go towards the top left, more like treasure as we go towards the bottom right. The main differences between ingots and traditional treasure were that the latter were also used as displays of wealth, whence their highly varied forms, which served to show off often high levels of craftsmanship as well as the precious metal itself. A great variety of very subtle and clever techniques were developed for maximizing the surface area covered by a given weight of gold or silver, more bling for the buck, since the metal was the main feature of the show. A great many cultures were observed to use non-coinage metal objects as money (by our definition), or treasure, or both, and a great many more probable such cases are implicit in the archaeological record. We can only mention a fraction of these as examples in this work. In Viking Iceland, silver rings (by weight) were used along with cloth and cattle to pay wergeld (compensation for injuries) and bridewealth, as well as a standard of value for exchange: Frithof breaks his ring in pieces and distributes it to his followers, so that they shall not be impecunious in the underworld. Rings were used in marriage payments and wergeld, the latter being estimated by haugatal or ring tale. A silver ring weighing 12 ounces was the compensation for the loss of a thrall, 100 rings or 100 head of cattle for a freeman. ([2] p284) Ring-money and hack-silver were also made and used in the rest of the pagan European north, including Scandinavia and early Anglo-Saxon England. In Celtic Ireland, &#8220;rings&#8221; in the form of divisible coils of gold or bronze were used along with cattle and slaves in injury compensation and bridewealth. ([4], [2] p287, [3] p238). In Homeric Greece, injury compensation, slave sales, and bridewealth often included gold by weight. ([5] p27, [11], [3] p91). In Rome before the introduction of coinage, bronze or copper ingots were used, per the Twelve Tables, to pay compensation for injuries. Non-coinage silver was also common until recent times in the vast Indian Ocean trade region as well as a number of inland cultures of south Asia. In Burma silver by weight was used for exchange and bridewealth: anybody wanting to transact business on the market must be provided with a lump of silver, a hammer, a chisel, weighing scales and weights.. he then quotes a price in weight. Thereupon they proceed to cut off from the lump of silver a corresponding piece which is then weighed. Often the operation has to be repeated several times until the correct weight is achieved. ([3] p95) In Siam, gold and silver &#8220;flowers&#8221; and &#8220;leaves&#8221; were used for bridewealth and tribute. ([2] p215, 219); various weights of silver &#8220;lumps&#8221; (small ingots) were also in widespread use ([3] p93). In the Hormuz and Lars in the Persian Gulf, and in some other parts around the Indian Ocean, were made the &#8220;fish-hook money&#8221; or silver larins used widely in the far-flung Indian Ocean trade. Such silver wires were accepted by weight across a dizzying variety of cultures. [2] p192-196 Larins, or silver wires bent double, and often stamped by maker; current in the very extensive Indian Ocean trade before and during the Age of Exploration. &#8220;If any suspect the goodness of the Plate it is the Custom to burn the Money in a fire red hot, and so put it in water; and if it be not then purely white it is not Currant Money.&#8221; ([2] p196) Such a technique would have worked for assaying a wide variety of wire-, coil-, or ring-like silver objects. Bronze bells manufactured in China were used to make high-value payments in several parts of the Chinese trading periphery, such as the Philippines. ([3] p84). In the Philippine lowlands, metal luxury goods (kettles, gongs, and jars) as well as gold beads were used for a variety of wealth display and transfer purposes ([2] p265). In China bells were the first objects that were uniquely metallic; other early metal objects such as knives, beads, etc. had been made out of other materials much earlier. Thus the Chinese adopted the word and pictograph of a bell 金 for metal (and even for gold in particular). Metal spades were styled 錢, which, via the spades that became stylized and stamped to invent early coins, became the Chinese term for &#8220;money&#8221;. [ Source ] Among the early coins &#8211; defined as standardized metal objects stamped with a standard value -- were the Chinese bronze spade money, c. 475-221 BC [ Source ] Copper crosses, rods, and similar shapes were popular forms of bridewealth and payment for exchange in the many cultures of the Congo ([2] p78-80). The Thonga, in what was then Portuguese East Africa, used brass rings along with mats, baskets, cattle, and beads for bridewealth, injury compensation, and fines. ([2] p104-5). The Ndebele and Nguni of Zimbabwe used brass rings and cattle for bridewealth and exchange. ([ Source1 ], [ Source2 ], and [2] p105) The people of Alor, a small island north of Timor in Indonesia, used brass gongs, pigs, and (for small change / rounding out of a specific value) arrows for exchange, bridewealth, burial feasts, and &#8220;complicated financial transactions&#8221; to build large clan houses. ([3] p84-6). Brass gongs and beads were also used for bridewealth by some cultures in nearby Borneo ([8] p10). Such gongs were used for injury compensation, bridewealth, large exchanges (memorialized in ceremony), and in peace-making payments also among the hill tribes of Siam, Burma and India ([2] p204-6, ) Brass pots and metal knives, axes, and hoes formed the largest part of the bridewealth of the Lakhers and Maras of the Lushai hills in India. ([8] p207). Most peoples indigenous to the Pacific Coast of America used shell beads as treasure or money (for example the Yurok ). Among the few who also used copper were the Kwakiutl, who fished for abundant salmon and lived in villages in the Pacific Northwest. They used blankets and flat copper sheets (similar in form and function to hack-silver) for bridewealth, tribute, distributions to followers (roughly similar to wages paid to soldiers and laborers), and distributions at funeral ceremonies. According to the anthropologist Frans Boas who observed them, these copper sheets served the &#8220;same function as a high-denomination bank note for us [early 20th century European-Americans].&#8221; ([2] p15, 300) In their elaborate marketplaces, Aztecs used as payment gold dust measured out by volume from bone vials: The moment we arrived in this immense market, we were perfectly astonished at the vast numbers of people, the profusion of merchandise which was exposed for sale, and at the good police and order that reigned throughout&#8230;instruments of brass, copper, and tin [and] gold dust as it is dug out of the mines, which was exposed to sale in tubes made of the bones of large geese&#8230;The value of these tubes of gold was estimated according to their length and thickness, and were taken for exchange, for instance, for so many mantles [of] cacao nuts, slaves or other merchandise.[5] The Aztecs also used metal money modeled on hoes (or axes) as a medium of exchange, along with cocoa beans for small change. Gold dust was also used for purchases in some parts of Siam.[3 p93]. Why did such a wide variety of cultures use, and in some cases independently invent, the use of copper and its alloys, silver, and/or gold as a store of and medium for the transfer of value? Copper, silver, and gold have the same outermost electron cloud, giving them similar electrical, chemical, and material properties, such as resistance to oxidization -- albeit due to subtleties in this cloud gold resists oxidization better than silver, which resists it better than copper. These properties enhance their durability and divisibility. Their malleability and low melting point allow them to be recycled and formed into desired shapes and makes them readily divisible. Heating the metals hot enough to glow, an ancient low-tech form of spectroscopy, allows the metals to be distinguished from fraudulent materials. (We know now that the electron cloud around each atom gives, unique for each element, off a pattern of light at unique wavelengths, seen by the eye as a unique color). Coins Metal stamped or cast with the brand of a highly reputable mint &#8211; often highly reputable because they were a large creditor that consistently accepted the coin in satisfaction of obligations -- had a significant, though not always decisive, advantage over other forms of metal money. Where the need for a fungible and divisible money that could change hands rapidly at low transaction costs was paramount, it came to displace other forms of metal money, and even significant amounts of treasure often ended up being recycled into coins. Coins could change hands in a reasonably secure manner with much less frequent need for weighing and assaying operations. Coins spread quickly, though not until modern times universally, from their origins in Greek and Chinese city-states. In the Middle East and Europe coins were stamped; in China they were cast. Alongside coins grew marketplaces. As the Aztec gold dust, Persian Gulf larins, Burmese silver &#8220;lumps&#8221;, and many other examples too numerous to mention demonstrate, coins were not necessary for the existence of marketplaces, but they did help make them more efficient and widespread. The Greek conqueror Alexander the Great looted the treasuries of the Near East, converting low-velocity treasure to high-velocity coinage, making his soldiers and Near East tradesmen better-paid in the process. The subsequent Hellenistic, Roman, Persian, and Arabian empires were built on such coinage, as were medieval, Renaissance, and early industrial-era European economies. The European exploration explosion was fueled by the search for precious metals and their use to trade around the globe. As Peter Swetz, translator of The Treviso Arithmetic observes that a favorite textbook example, the alligation problem, which involved the mixing of substances in various ratios, was exemplified by the reminting of coins. &#8220;[T]he value of money [coin] was not determined by its face value, but rather its content of precious metal&#8230;throughout the sixteenth century, chapters on alligation in arithmetic books were particularly intended for German mint-masters &#8230;[and]&#8230;Italian goldsmiths.&#8221; This was not the only use of alligation &#8211; it also could be applied to compounding medicines, the mixing of wines, and to metallurgy more generally &#8211; but it was the most valuable and compelling example of the technique. Here is one of the problems as set forth for the student: A merchant has 46 marks 7 ounces of silver in which he knows there is 7 &#188; ounces of fine silver per mark. He wishes to reduce the purity of his silver to less than half [the example also serves to warn the apprentice merchant of such sharp practices], down to 3 &#189; ounces of fine silver per mark. The question asks, &#8220;how much brass must be added to accomplish this&#8221;? Thereafter follows multiplication and division using some Renaissance-era shortcuts suitable for this kind of problem. And voila , the minter&#8217;s coins have been successfully reduced in value (hopefully along with their stated face value &#8211; the textbook does not mention that aspect) and increased in number. Touchstone and needles used by traditional European goldsmiths for assaying gold, silver, and copper, whether as coins or as jewelry. Each needle presents the visual difference made by different percentage compositions of the three metals. Outside of this western Eurasian area, however, many non-coinage forms of money persisted and forms of debt and fiat money represented by paper were invented. When paper debt-money reaches the West, with bills of exchange to send money across hostile lands and later bank notes representing vaults hopefully full of gold, we have reached a more recent period of monetary history and our minds have ventured far beyond the origins of money. We will end here. Non-Internet References [1] Bohannan, Paul (1959). "The Impact of money on an African subsistence economy". The Journal of Economic History. 19 (4): 491&#8211;503. [2] A. Hingston Quiggin, A Survey of Primitive Money: The Beginnings of Currency , Muethen & Co. Ltd., 1949 [3] Paul Einzig, Primitive Money in Its Ethnological, Historical, and Economic Aspects , Pergamon Press, 2nd ed. 1966 [4] W.B. Dickinson, &#8220;In Defense of Ring-Money as a Medium of Exchange&#8221;, The Numismatic Chronicle and Journal of the Numismatic Society, v. 16 (April 1853) [5] Grierson, Philip (1977) The origins of money . London: The Athlone Press, University of London. [6] Howard J. Erlichman, Conquest, Tribute, and Trade: The Quest for Precious Metals and the Birth of Globalization , Promethus Books 2010. Aztec gold dust quote on p97, quoting Bernal de Castillo in The True and Full Account of the Discovery and Conquest of Mexico and New Spain [7] Weatherford, Jack (1997). The History of Mone y. Crown Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-55674-5 Jurors examining gold coins in a recent Trial of the Pyx . This assay and audit of the British Royal Mint has been conducted periodically since the Middle Age s. Isaac Newton and many other luminaries have been involved. It is structured much like an actual court trial, with a presiding judge, a jury of laymen, and a second jury of expert goldsmiths. It also includes the most advanced assay techniques available (today including detailed spectroscopy). The purpose of this elaborate audit and ceremony is to ensure and to communicate to outsiders that the mere local cultural form is &#8220;pure&#8221;, i.e. that the coins accurately label and embody the actual amount of the actually desired natural substance. The British love their traditions and the Trial of the Pyx continues to this day. Posted by Nick Szabo at 12:25 AM 4 comments: Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest Older Posts Home Subscribe to: Comments (Atom) Pages Home About Me Nick Szabo "A premier thinker about history, law and economics, and the lessons they have for security." -- Adam Shostack, Emergent Chaos "Szabo comes out with these essays that leave me in awe." -- Brian Dunbar "Reading material that is eclectic, challenging and endlessly fascinating." -- Sean McGrath, Propylon "Like most blogs worth my attention, this blog is updated only infrequently. That is because the authors of blogs worth my attention only post when they have something to say that is true, relevant and not already known by their audience. Most of the human race does not have the skill to know when an idea has these three properties. The skill is particularly rare in the fields of politics and economics, which is why this blog is such a rare and valuable thing." -- Richard Hollerith View my complete profile Blog Archive &#9660;&#160; 2018 (1) &#9660;&#160; March (1) The many traditions of non-governmental money (par... &#9658;&#160; 2017 (3) &#9658;&#160; March (1) &#9658;&#160; February (2) &#9658;&#160; 2016 (4) &#9658;&#160; December (1) &#9658;&#160; July (1) &#9658;&#160; March (1) &#9658;&#160; February (1) &#9658;&#160; 2015 (3) &#9658;&#160; October (1) &#9658;&#160; July (1) &#9658;&#160; May (1) &#9658;&#160; 2014 (3) &#9658;&#160; December (1) &#9658;&#160; October (1) &#9658;&#160; July (1) &#9658;&#160; 2013 (3) &#9658;&#160; November (1) &#9658;&#160; August (1) &#9658;&#160; July (1) &#9658;&#160; 2012 (8) &#9658;&#160; October (2) &#9658;&#160; August (2) &#9658;&#160; July (4) &#9658;&#160; 2011 (12) &#9658;&#160; December (1) &#9658;&#160; July (1) &#9658;&#160; June (2) &#9658;&#160; May (2) &#9658;&#160; February (2) &#9658;&#160; January (4) &#9658;&#160; 2010 (9) &#9658;&#160; December (1) &#9658;&#160; October (4) &#9658;&#160; September (2) &#9658;&#160; February (2) &#9658;&#160; 2009 (29) &#9658;&#160; November (3) &#9658;&#160; October (6) &#9658;&#160; September (3) &#9658;&#160; August (1) &#9658;&#160; July (1) &#9658;&#160; June (3) &#9658;&#160; May (6) &#9658;&#160; April (3) &#9658;&#160; January (3) &#9658;&#160; 2008 (55) &#9658;&#160; December (2) &#9658;&#160; October (2) &#9658;&#160; September (4) &#9658;&#160; August (9) &#9658;&#160; July (4) &#9658;&#160; June (6) &#9658;&#160; May (6) &#9658;&#160; April (4) &#9658;&#160; March (10) &#9658;&#160; February (5) &#9658;&#160; January (3) &#9658;&#160; 2007 (47) &#9658;&#160; December (1) &#9658;&#160; October (2) &#9658;&#160; September (8) &#9658;&#160; August (10) &#9658;&#160; July (4) &#9658;&#160; June (4) &#9658;&#160; May (8) &#9658;&#160; April (1) &#9658;&#160; March (2) &#9658;&#160; February (4) &#9658;&#160; January (3) &#9658;&#160; 2006 (130) &#9658;&#160; December (4) &#9658;&#160; November (7) &#9658;&#160; October (15) &#9658;&#160; September (15) &#9658;&#160; August (20) &#9658;&#160; July (5) &#9658;&#160; June (10) &#9658;&#160; May (4) &#9658;&#160; April (3) &#9658;&#160; March (11) &#9658;&#160; February (10) &#9658;&#160; January (26) &#9658;&#160; 2005 (44) &#9658;&#160; December (16) &#9658;&#160; November (5) &#9658;&#160; October (23) Simple theme. Powered by Blogger .403 Forbidden 148 captures 17 Dec 2002 - 21 Sep 2016 Jun JUL Aug 27 2015 2016 2017 success fail About this capture COLLECTED BY Organization: Internet Archive The Internet Archive discovers and captures web pages through many different web crawls. At any given time several distinct crawls are running, some for months, and some every day or longer. View the web archive through the Wayback Machine . Collection: Live Web Proxy Crawls Content crawled via the Wayback Machine Live Proxy mostly by the Save Page Now feature on web.archive.org. Liveweb proxy is a component of Internet Archive’s wayback machine project. The liveweb proxy captures the content of a web page in real time, archives it into a ARC or WARC file and returns the ARC/WARC record back to the wayback machine to process. The recorded ARC/WARC file becomes part of the wayback machine in due course of time. TIMESTAMPS The Wayback Machine - https://web.archive.org/web/20160727084426/http://szabo.best.vwh.net/shell.html Forbidden You don't have permission to access /shell.html on this server.The Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterDonateToggle languageENOpen main menuThe Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterLibrary/The Idea of Smart ContractsLibraryThe Idea of Smart ContractsNick SzaboOriginally published in 1997External linkWhat is the meaning and purpose of “security”? How does it relate the the relationships we have? I argue that the formalizations of our relationships—especially contracts—provide the blueprint for ideal security.
Many kinds of contractual clauses (such as collateral, bonding, delineation of property rights, etc.) can be embedded in the hardware and software we deal with, in such a way as to make breach of contract expensive (if desired, sometimes prohibitively so) for the breacher. A canonical real-life example, which we might consider to be the primitive ancestor of smart contracts, is the humble vending machine. Within a limited amount of potential loss (the amount in the till should be less than the cost of breaching the mechanism), the machine takes in coins, and via a simple mechanism, which makes a freshman computer science problem in design with finite automata, dispense change and product according to the displayed price. The vending machine is a contract with bearer: anybody with coins can participate in an exchange with the vendor. The lockbox and other security mechanisms protect the stored coins and contents from attackers, sufficiently to allow profitable deployment of vending machines in a wide variety of areas.
Smart contracts go beyond the vending machine in proposing to embed contracts in all sorts of property that is valuable and controlled by digital means. Smart contracts reference that property in a dynamic, often proactively enforced form, and provide much better observation and verification where proactive measures must fall short.
As another example, consider a hypothetical digital security system for automobiles. The smart contract design strategy suggests that we successively refine security protocols to more fully embed in a property the contractual terms which deal with it. These protocols would give control of the cryptographic keys for operating the property to the person who rightfully owns that property, based on the terms of the contract. In the most straightforward implementation, the car can be rendered inoperable unless the proper challenge-response protocol is completed with its rightful owner, preventing theft.
If the car is being used to secure credit, strong security implemented in this traditional way would create a headache for the creditor - the repo man would no longer be able to confiscate a deadbeat’s car. To redress this problem, we can create a smart lien protocol: if the owner fails to make payments, the smart contract invokes the lien protocol, which returns control of the car keys to the bank. This protocol might be much cheaper and more effective than a repo man. A further reification would provably remove the lien when the loan has been paid off, as well as account for hardship and operational exceptions. For example, it would be rude to revoke operation of the car while it’s doing 75 down the freeway.
In this process of successive refinement we’ve gone from a crude security system to a reified contract:
(1) A lock to selectively let in the owner and
    exlude third parties;
(2) A back door to let in the creditor;
(3a) Creditor back door switched on only upon nonpayment
     for a certain period of time; and
(3b) The final electronic payment permanently switches
     off the back door.
Mature security systems will be undertaking different behavior for different contracts. To continue with our example, if the automobile contract were a lease, the final payment would switch off leasee access; for purchase on credit, it would switch off creditor access. A security system, by successive redesign, increasingly approaches the logic of the contract which governs the rights and obligations covering the object, information, or computation being secured. Qualitatively different contractual terms, as well as technological differences in the property, give rise to the need for different protocols.
(Derived from “Formalizing and Securing Relationships on Public Networks”, by Nick Szabo)
A related article discusses a formal language for analyzing contracts and specifying smart contracts.
Please send your comments to nszabo (at) law (dot) gwu (dot) edu
Copyright © 1997 by Nick Szabo
Permission to redistribute without alteration hereby grantedAboutContactPodcastsFeedNewsletterDonateGet involvedGitHubXNostrSatoshi Nakamoto InstituteEstablished block#272,311Satoshi Nakamoto Institute is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. Some works may be subject to other licenses.
The Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterDonateToggle languageENOpen main menuThe Complete SatoshiLibraryMempoolNewsletterLibrary/Trusted Third Parties are Security HolesLibraryTrusted Third Parties are Security HolesNick SzaboOriginally published in 2001External linkIntroduction
Commercial security is a matter of solving the practical problems of business relationships such as privacy, integrity, protecting property, or detecting breach of contract. A security hole is any weakness that increases the risk of violating these goals. In this real world view of security, a problem does not dissapear because a designer assumes it away. The invocation or assumption in a security protocol design of a “trusted third party” (TTP) or a “trusted computing base” (TCB) controlled by a third party constitutes the introduction of a security hole into that design. The security hole will then need to be plugged by other means.
If the risks and costs of TTP institutional alternatives were not accounted for in the protocol design, the resulting protocol will in most cases be too costly or risky to be practical. If the protocol beats these odds and proves practical, it will only succeed after extensive effort has gone into plugging the TTP security hole(s). TTP assumptions cause most of the costs and risks in a security protocol, and plugging TTP security holes produces the most benefit and profit.
As a result, we propose a security protocol design methodology whereby the most risky and expensive part(s) of a security protocol, the trusted third partie(s), are designed in parallel with security protocol(s) using those parties. The objectives of cost and risk minimization are focused on the TTPs rather than the security protocols themselves, which should be designed to suit the cost and risk minimized TTPs.
We also briefly discuss and reference research and implementation in security mechanisms that radically reduce trusted third party costs and risks by distributing automated TTPs across several parties, only a portion of which need to act in a reliable or trustworthy matter for the protocol to be reliable or trustworthy.
New Trusted Third Parties are Costly and Risky
This author has professional experience implementing a TTP that was assumed by early advocates of public key cryptography. This TTP has come to be called a “certificate authority” (CA). It has been given the responsibility of vouching for the “identity” of participants. (Here I focus on the costs imposed by the TTP; alternatives such as PGP’s Web of Trust and SPKI have been discussed amply elsewhere).
The certificate authority has proved to be by far the most expensive component of this centralized public key infrastructure (PKI). This is exacerbated when the necessity for a TTP deemed by protocol designers is translated, in PKI standards such as SSL and S/MIME, into a requirement for a TTP. A TTP that must be trusted by all users of a protocol becomes an arbiter of who may and may not use the protocol. So that, for example, to run a secure SSL web server, or to participate in S/MIME, one must obtain a certifcate from a mutually trusted certificate authority. The earliest and most popular of these has been Verisign. It has been able to charge several hundred dollars for end user certificates – far outstripping the few dollars charged (implicitly in the cost of end user software) for the security protocol code itself. The bureaucratic process of applying for and renewing certificates takes up far more time than configuring the SSL options, and the CA’s identification process is subject to far greater exposure than the SSL protocol itself. Verisign amassed a stock market valuation in the 10’s of billions of U.S. dollars (even before it went into another TTP business, the Internet Domain Name System(DNS) by acquiring Network Solutions). How? By coming up with a solution – any solution, almost, as its security is quite crude and costly compared to the cryptographic components of a PKI – to the seemingly innocuous assumption of a “trusted third party” made by the designers of public key protocols for e-mail and the Web.
Some more problems with CAs are dealt with here.
The Internet DNS is another example of the high costs and risks imposed by a TTP. This one tiny part of the TCP/IP protocol stack has accounted for a majority of the disputes and handwringing involving that protocol. Why? Because it is one of the few areas of the TCP/IP stack that depends on a centralized hieararchy of TTPs rather than on protocol negotiations between individual Internet nodes. The DNS is also the single component of the Internet most likely to fail even when its names are not being disputed or spoofed.
The high costs of implementing a TTP come about mainly because traditional security solutions, which must be invoked where the protocol itself leaves off, involve high personnel costs. For more information on the necessity and security benefits of these traditional security solutions, especially personnel controls, when implementing TTP organizations, see this author’s essay on group controls. The risks and costs borne by protocol users also come to be dominated by the unreliability of the TTP – the DNS and certificate authorities being two quite commom sources of unreliability and frustration with the Internet and PKIs respectively.
Existing Trusted Third Parties are Valuable
Companies like Visa, Dun and Bradstreet, Underwriter’s Laboratories, and so forth connect untrusting strangers into a common trust network. Our economy depends on them. Many developing countries lack these trust hubs and would benefit greatly from integrating with developed world hubs like these. While these organizations often have many flaws and weaknesses – credit card companies, for example, have growing problems with fraud, identity theft, and innacurate reports, and Barings recently went belly up because their control systems had not properly adapted to digital securities trading – by and large these institutions will be with us for a long time.
This doesn’t help us get TTPs for new protocols. These institutions have a particular way of doing business that is highly evolved and specialized. They usually cannot “hill climb” to a substantially different way of doing business. Substantial innovations in new areas, e.g. e-commerce and digital security, must come from elsewhere. Any new protocol design, especially paradigmatically different areas such as capabilities or cryptographic computations, will be a mismatch to the existing institutions. Since building new TTPs from scratch is so costly, it is far cheaper when introducing protocols from these institutionally novel security technologies to minimize their dependencies on TTPs.
New Trusted Third Parties Can Be Tempting
Many are the reasons why organizations may come to favor costly TTP based security over more efficient and effective security that minimizes the use of TTPs:
Limitations of imagination, effort, knowledge, or time amongst protocol designers – it is far easier to design security protocols that rely on TTPs than those that do not (i.e. to fob off the problem rather than solve it). Naturally design costs are an important factor limiting progress towards minimizing TTPs in security protocols. A bigger factor is lack of awareness of the importance of the problem among many security architects, especially the corporate architects who draft Internet and wireless security standards.
The temptation to claim the “high ground” as a TTP of choice are great. The ambition to become the next Visa or Verisign is a power trip that’s hard to refuse. The barriers to actually building a successful TTP business are, however, often severe – the startup costs are substantial, ongoing costs remain high, liability risks are great, and unless there is a substantial “first mover” advantage barriers to entry for competitors are few. Still, if nobody solves the TTP problems in the protocol this can be a lucrative business, and it’s easy to envy big winners like Verisign rather than remembering all the now obscure companies that tried but lost. It’s also easy to imagine oneself as the successful TTP, and come to advocate the security protocol that requires the TTP, rather than trying harder to actually solve the security problem.
Entrenched interests. Large numbers of articulate professionals make their living using the skills necessary in TTP organizations. For example, the legions of auditors and lawyers who create and operate traditional control structures and legal protections. They naturally favor security models that assume they must step in and implement the real security. In new areas like e-commerce they favor new business models based on TTPs (e.g. Application Service Providers) rather than taking the time to learn new practices that may threaten their old skills.
Mental transaction costs. Trust, like taste, is a subjective judgment. Making such judgement requires mental effort. A third party with a good reputation, and that is actually trustworthy, can save its customers from having to do so much research or bear other costs associated with making these judgments. However, entities that claim to be trusted but end up not being trustworthy impose costs not only of a direct nature, when they breach the trust, but increase the general cost of trying to choose between trustworthy and treacherous trusted third parties.
Personal Property Has Not and Should Not Depend On TTPs
For most of human history the dominant form of property has been personal property. The functionality of personal property has not under normal conditions ever depended on trusted third parties. Security properties of simple goods could be verified at sale or first use, and there was no need for continued interaction with the manufacturer or other third parties (other than on occasion repair personel after exceptional use and on a voluntary and temporary basis). Property rights for many kinds of chattel (portable property) were only minimally dependent on third parties – the only problem where TTPs were neededwas to defend against the depredations of other third parties. The main security property of personal chattel was often not other TTPs as protectors but rather its portability and intimacy.
Here are some examples of the ubiquity of personal property in which there was a reality or at least a strong desire on the part of owners to be free of dependence on TTPs for functionality or security:
Jewelry (far more often used for money in traditional cultures than coins, e.g. Northern Europe up to 1000 AD, and worn on the body for better property protection as well as decoration)
Automobiles operated by and house doors opened by personal keys.
Personal computers – in the original visions of many personal computing pioneers (e.g. many members of the Homebrew Computer Club), the PC was intended as personal property – the owner would have total control (and understanding) of the software running on the PC, including the ability to copy bits on the PC at will. Software complexity, Internet connectivity, and unresolved incentive mismatches between software publishers and users (PC owners) have substantially eroded the reality of the personal computer as personal property.
This desire is instinctive and remains today. It manifests in consumer resistance when they discover unexpected dependence on and vulnerability to third parties in the devices they use. Suggestions that the functionality of personal property be dependent on third parties, even agreed to ones under strict conditions such as creditors until a chattel loan is paid off (a smart lien) are met with strong resistance. Making personal property functionality dependent on trusted third parties (i.e. trusted rather than forced by the protocol to keep to the agreement governing the security protocol and property) is in most cases quite unacceptable.
TTP Minimizing Methodology
We now propose a security protocol design methodology whereby protocol(s) are designed to minimize these costs and risks of the TTPs. Minimizing the costs and risks of the security protocol(s) themselves is an important but secondary priority.
Currently, security designers usually invoke or assume TTPs to suit the most elegant and secure or least computationally costly security protocol. These naive TTPs are then used in a proof of concept of an overall protocol architecture. But this does not discover the important things that need to be discovered. Once a security protocol is implemented the code itself costs very little, and exponential cost functions such as Moore’s law keep reducing computational, bandwidth, and many other technological costs. The costs of the security protocol itself (except for the costs of message rounds, limited by the speed of light, and the costs of the user interface, limited by mental transaction costs) approach zero. By far the largest long-term cost of the system (as we learned with PKI) is the cost of implementing the TTPs.
It’s far more fruitful to estimate from the beginning what the TTPs will cost, rather than try to design the security protocols to minimize the costs of the TTPs. This will likely bring the designer to quite different trust assumptions and thus security protocols than if (s)he assumes pure, unanalyzed TTPs in certain places in order to simplify the security protocol. A natural corrolary is if that there exists a security protocol that can eliminate or greatly reduce the costs of a TTP, then it pays greatly to implement it rather than one which assumes a costly TTP. Even if the latter security protocol is simpler and much more computationally efficient.
A corollary of “trusted third parties are security holes” is “all security protocols have security holes”, since no protocol is fully free of such assumptions. The key steps in estimating TTP costs and risk are to (1) examine one’s assumptions thoroughly to uncover all TTP assumptions and characterize specifically what each TTP is and is not expected to do, (2) observe that each such specific hole and task has an associated cost and risk.
There are several other important considerations, including:
Design costs. Minimizing TTPs often involves learning and applying nonintuitive and complex cryptographic and fault tolerance techniques, like some of those mentioned below. This can be a major burden or impractical for a small smart contracts project. On the other hand, design costs for a novel TTP institution are usually much higher than the design costs for a new protocol, as expensive as the latter may be. Determining whether the new institution is robust over the long term is more expensive still, while protocols can be formally analyzed and implementations audited against this analysis to achieve a very high level of confidence in a typical product development timeframe.
User mental transaction costs – multiplying TTPs, even ones with a reasonably limited function, can quickly tax the ability of end users to track the reputation and quality of the different trusted brands. When TTPs are distributed (as in the technology described below) reputation tracking must be automated, which is much easier when the TTPs redundantly perform the same function.
If for a new context like e-commerce we can find a security protocol which replaces a TTP organization (a complex set of traditions quite unproven in the new context) with mathematics (which at least in itself is quite clear and provable) it will often be a very big win to do so. More often we will replace a complex costly TTP with one or more much simpler TTPs plus mathematics. That too is a big win. We can only tell if and by how much it is a win by focusing on the trust assumptions and the resulting costs of the TTPs rather than focusing on the efficiency of the security protocol. The key is to focus on the cost of the TTPs and design the security protocol to minimize them, rather than assuming TTPs in order to simplify or optimize the efficiency of the security protocol.
A good digital security protocol designer is not only an expert in computer science and cryptography, but also very knowledgeable about the traditional costly techniques of physical security, auditing, law, and the business relationships to be secured. This knowledge is not used to substitute these costly security methods for more cost effective digital security, but in order to minimize hidden dependence on costly methods for the real security. A good protocol designer also designs, rather than merely assumes, TTPs that work with minimal use of costly techniques.
TTP Minimizing Protocols
We saw above that the keys to minimizing TTPs are to identify them, characterize them, estimate their costs and risks, and then design protocols around TTPs of minimal cost and risk. When the risk is mitigated with techniques like those in this session, it can be very substantially reduced.
Three areas of research and implementation show special promise in improving trust. Two of these involve the particularly thorny area of privacy, where breach of trust is often irreversible – once data gets out it can be impossible to put back.
The first protocol family in which trust can be distributed to preserve privacy is the Chaum mixes. Mixes allow communications immune from third party tracing. Only any one out of N proxies in a proxy chain need be trustworthy for the privacy to be preserved. Unfortunately, all N of the proxies need to be reliable or the message will be lost and must be resent. The digital mix protocol’s tradeoff is to increase messaging delays (resends) in order to minimizes the risk of irreversible privacy loss.
Another protocol family in which trust can be distributed to preserve privacy is the multiparty private computations. Here a virtual computer is distributed across the N parties who provide specially encrypted input to each other rather than to a trusted third party. The distributed computer takes inputs from each of the N parties, computes an agreed to algorithm, then outputs the answer. Each party learns only the answer not the inputs of any other party. The threshold of parties that that must collude to violate privacy or threaten reliability can be traded off and have been studied in detail in the ample literature on this topic. Multiparty private computations can be used for confidential auditing, confidential preference gathering and data mining, auctions and exchanges with confidential bids, and so on.
A protocol family that replicates data, and distributes operations on that data, while preserving the integrity of that data, are the Byzantine resilient replicated databases. Implementations of Byzantine resilient replicated databases include Fleet and Phalanx. Fleet implements replicated persistence of general purpose objects. Some open source implementations, which approach but do not achieve Byzantine resilience, general purpose, or complete decentralization include  Mojo Nation and Freenet. Applications include secure name registries and property titles as well as securely published content in Mojo Nation and Freenet. The most advace work in this area involves Byzantine fault tolerant quorum systems and other recent advanced in distributed security.
It is important to note that these threshold techniques are only meant to enhance the integrity of a single step or run of the protocol. Practical systems, such as Mojo Nation, combine a majority or super-majority within a particular run with failure detection and choice by clients of servers between runs. So we can add back all the reputation systems, auditing, and so on that add robustness in the long term to distributed systems. The majorities or super-majorities within an invocation create a very good short-term robustness that is missing from current systems like Freenet and Mojo Nation. (It’s only party missing from Mojo, which has a 4-of-8 voting scheme but this has not been shown to be Byzantine resilient up to 4-of-8).
Remote Attestation of Server Code
Remote attestation has been proposed for verifying the state of software running on clients to protect intellectual property. A more valuable use for remote attestation is for verifying the behavior of servers. This is also called the transparent server approach. Through remote attestation, clients can verify that the specific desired code is running on a server. Combined with the ability to audit that code as open source, remote attestation of servers can greatly decrease the vulnerability of clients and users to the server. Given the importance of the trusted third party problem we have discussed here, this approach has vast potential to convert trusted third party protocols into secure protocols, and to make possible a wide variety of secure protocols that were heretofore impossible. For example, Hal Finney has implemented a version of bit gold called reusable proofs of work, based on a secure coprrocessor board that allows users to remotely attest the code running on the card. While one still needs to trust the manufacturer of the card, this manufacturer is separated from the installation of server code onto and the operation of the server on the card.
Leaving Small Holes Unplugged
Often the protocol designer can’t figure out how to fix a vulnerability. If the attack one needs a TTP to protect against is not a serious real-world threat in the context of the application the designer is trying to secure, it is better to simply leave the small hole unplugged than to assign the task to a TTP. In the case of public key cryptography, for example, protocol designers haven’t figured out how to prevent a “man-in-the-middle” (MITM) attack during the initial key exchange. SSL tried to prevent this by requiring CAs as trusted third parties, as described above, and this solution cost the web community billions of dollars in certificate fees and lost opportunities to secure communications. SSH, on the other hand, decided to simply leave this small hole unplugged. The MITM hole has, to the best of my knowledge, never even once been exploited to compromise the privacy of an SSH user, yet SSH is far more widely used to protect privacy than SSL, at a tiny fraction of the cost. This economical approach to security has been looked at at greater length by Ian Grigg.
Unscrambling the Terminology
Alan Karp, Mark Miller, and others have observed the confusion over words like “trust” and “trusted” as used in the security community, and proposed replacing the verb “trusts” with “is vulnerable to”. This substitution is a great way to radically clarify security protocol designs. “Trusted third party” as used in this essay becomes “vulnerable to a third party”, and the point of this paper, that this is a security hole, becomes obvious.
In the context of protocol designs, instead of saying the protocol designer trusts some little-known generic class of parties (referred to in the singular as “a trusted third party”) with a given authorization (which probably really means the protocol designer just can’t figure out how to plug a security hole), an honest protocol designer will admit that there is a vulnerability here – and that it is up to “out of band” mechanisms to plug or minimize, or up to users to knowledgeably ignore, that hole. The class of parties is little-known because security protocol designers typically don’t know much about the traditional non-digital security, legal, and institutional solutions needed to make such a party trustworthy. The substitution of “vulnerable to” for “trusted” works well in protocol design, and in communicating honestly about the security of a protocol.
Alas, are security designers and sellers of security systems who invoke “trusted third parties”, “trusted computing”, and the like really going to come out and admit that their protocols are “vulnerable”? Security designs sound so much more secure when they use the euphemism “trust”.
In the real world, beyond the technical context of security protocol design, “trust” has a variety of meanings. One different use of “trust” is well-informed trust, for example “I trust this armor to protect me from normal bullets, because it’s been very well tested”, “I trust this site with this authorization because we’re using a strong security protocol to protect me when I grant this authorization”, or “I trust my wife with the kids”, in which cases translating “trust” to “am vulnerable to” would be to reverse its meaning. That “trust” can take on practically opposite meanings, depending upon the context, is another strong argument for avoiding use of the word when describing the vulnerabilities, or lack thereof, of security protocols. Whether a designer thinks he does or must trust some generic class of parties is one thing. Whether a particular user will actually trust a particular entity in that class when the protocol actually runs is quite another matter. Whether either the user’s trust or the designer’s trust is well informed is yet another matter still.
Conclusion
Traditional security is costly and risky. Digital security when designed well diminishes dramatically in cost over time. When a protocol designer invokes or assumes a TTP, (s)he is creating the need for a novel organization to try to solve an unsolved security problem via traditional security and control methods. Especially in a digital context these methods require continuing high expenditures by the TTP and the TTP creates a bottleneck which imposes continuing high costs and risks on the end user.
A far better methodology is to work starting from TTPs that either well known, or easy to characterize, and of minimal cost. The best “TTP” of all is one that does not exist, but the necessity for which has been eliminated by the protocol design, or which has been automated and distributed amongst the parties to a protocol. The latter strategy has given rise to the most promising areas of security protocol research including digital mixes, multiparty private computations, and Byzantine resiliant databases. These and similar implementations will be used to radically reduce the cost of current TTPs and to solve the many outstanding problems in privacy, integrity, property rights, and contract enforcement while minimizing the very high costs of creating and operating new TTP institutions.
References
Links in the text.
Acknowledgements
My thanks to Mark Miller who encouraged me to write down these thoughts and provided many good comments. My thanks also to Hal Finney, Marc Stiegler, David Wager, and Ian Grigg for their comments.
Please send your comments to nszabo (at) law (dot) gwu (dot) edu
Copyright © 2001, 2004, 2005 by Nick Szabo
Permission to redistribute without alteration hereby grantedAboutContactPodcastsFeedNewsletterDonateGet involvedGitHubXNostrSatoshi Nakamoto InstituteEstablished block#272,311Satoshi Nakamoto Institute is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. Some works may be subject to other licenses.
